I had now been in this unhappy island above ten months.  All possibility
of deliverance from this condition seemed to be entirely taken from me;
and I firmly believe that no human shape had ever set foot upon that
place.  Having now secured my habitation, as I thought, fully to my mind,
I had a great desire to make a more perfect discovery of the island, and
to see what other productions I might find, which I yet knew nothing of.

It was on the 15th of July that I began to take a more particular survey
of the island itself.  I went up the creek first, where, as I hinted, I
brought my rafts on shore.  I found after I came about two miles up, that
the tide did not flow any higher, and that it was no more than a little
brook of running water, very fresh and good; but this being the dry
season, there was hardly any water in some parts of it—at least not
enough to run in any stream, so as it could be perceived.  On the banks
of this brook I found many pleasant savannahs or meadows, plain, smooth,
and covered with grass; and on the rising parts of them, next to the
higher grounds, where the water, as might be supposed, never overflowed,
I found a great deal of tobacco, green, and growing to a great and very
strong stalk.  There were divers other plants, which I had no notion of
or understanding about, that might, perhaps, have virtues of their own,
which I could not find out.  I searched for the cassava root, which the
Indians, in all that climate, make their bread of, but I could find none.
I saw large plants of aloes, but did not understand them.  I saw several
sugar-canes, but wild, and, for want of cultivation, imperfect.  I
contented myself with these discoveries for this time, and came back,
musing with myself what course I might take to know the virtue and
goodness of any of the fruits or plants which I should discover, but
could bring it to no conclusion; for, in short, I had made so little
observation while I was in the Brazils, that I knew little of the plants
in the field; at least, very little that might serve to any purpose now
in my distress.

The next day, the sixteenth, I went up the same way again; and after
going something further than I had gone the day before, I found the brook
and the savannahs cease, and the country become more woody than before.
In this part I found different fruits, and particularly I found melons
upon the ground, in great abundance, and grapes upon the trees.  The
vines had spread, indeed, over the trees, and the clusters of grapes were
just now in their prime, very ripe and rich.  This was a surprising
discovery, and I was exceeding glad of them; but I was warned by my
experience to eat sparingly of them; remembering that when I was ashore
in Barbary, the eating of grapes killed several of our Englishmen, who
were slaves there, by throwing them into fluxes and fevers.  But I found
an excellent use for these grapes; and that was, to cure or dry them in
the sun, and keep them as dried grapes or raisins are kept, which I
thought would be, as indeed they were, wholesome and agreeable to eat
when no grapes could be had.

I spent all that evening there, and went not back to my habitation;
which, by the way, was the first night, as I might say, I had lain from
home.  In the night, I took my first contrivance, and got up in a tree,
where I slept well; and the next morning proceeded upon my discovery;
travelling nearly four miles, as I might judge by the length of the
valley, keeping still due north, with a ridge of hills on the south and
north side of me.  At the end of this march I came to an opening where
the country seemed to descend to the west; and a little spring of fresh
water, which issued out of the side of the hill by me, ran the other way,
that is, due east; and the country appeared so fresh, so green, so
flourishing, everything being in a constant verdure or flourish of spring
that it looked like a planted garden.  I descended a little on the side
of that delicious vale, surveying it with a secret kind of pleasure,
though mixed with my other afflicting thoughts, to think that this was
all my own; that I was king and lord of all this country indefensibly,
and had a right of possession; and if I could convey it, I might have it
in inheritance as completely as any lord of a manor in England.  I saw
here abundance of cocoa trees, orange, and lemon, and citron trees; but
all wild, and very few bearing any fruit, at least not then.  However,
the green limes that I gathered were not only pleasant to eat, but very
wholesome; and I mixed their juice afterwards with water, which made it
very wholesome, and very cool and refreshing.  I found now I had business
enough to gather and carry home; and I resolved to lay up a store as well
of grapes as limes and lemons, to furnish myself for the wet season,
which I knew was approaching.  In order to do this, I gathered a great
heap of grapes in one place, a lesser heap in another place, and a great
parcel of limes and lemons in another place; and taking a few of each
with me, I travelled homewards; resolving to come again, and bring a bag
or sack, or what I could make, to carry the rest home.  Accordingly,
having spent three days in this journey, I came home (so I must now call
my tent and my cave); but before I got thither the grapes were spoiled;
the richness of the fruit and the weight of the juice having broken them
and bruised them, they were good for little or nothing; as to the limes,
they were good, but I could bring but a few.

The next day, being the nineteenth, I went back, having made me two small
bags to bring home my harvest; but I was surprised, when coming to my
heap of grapes, which were so rich and fine when I gathered them, to find
them all spread about, trod to pieces, and dragged about, some here, some
there, and abundance eaten and devoured.  By this I concluded there were
some wild creatures thereabouts, which had done this; but what they were
I knew not.  However, as I found there was no laying them up on heaps,
and no carrying them away in a sack, but that one way they would be
destroyed, and the other way they would be crushed with their own weight,
I took another course; for I gathered a large quantity of the grapes, and
hung upon the out-branches of the trees, that they might cure and dry in
the sun; and as for the limes and lemons, I carried as many back as I
could well stand under.


