I then began to write to my friend at the bank in a more kindly style,
and particularly about the beginning of July I sent him a letter, that
I proposed to be in town some time in August.  He returned me an answer
in the most passionate terms imaginable, and desired me to let him have
timely notice, and he would come and meet me, two day's journey.  This
puzzled me scurvily, and I did not know what answer to make of it.
Once I resolved to take the stage-coach to West Chester, on purpose
only to have the satisfaction of coming back, that he might see me
really come in the same coach; for I had a jealous thought, though I
had no ground for it at all, lest he should think I was not really in
the country.  And it was no ill-grounded thought as you shall hear
presently.

I endeavoured to reason myself out of it, but it was in vain; the
impression lay so strong on my mind, that it was not to be resisted.
At last it came as an addition to my new design of going into the
country, that it would be an excellent blind to my old governess, and
would cover entirely all my other affairs, for she did not know in the
least whether my new lover lived in London or in Lancashire; and when I
told her my resolution, she was fully persuaded it was in Lancashire.

Having taken my measure for this journey I let her know it, and sent
the maid that tended me, from the beginning, to take a place for me in
the coach.  She would have had me let the maid have waited on me down
to the last stage, and come up again in the waggon, but I convinced her
it would not be convenient.  When I went away, she told me she would
enter into no measures for correspondence, for she saw evidently that
my affection to my child would cause me to write to her, and to visit
her too when I came to town again.  I assured her it would, and so took
my leave, well satisfied to have been freed from such a house, however
good my accommodations there had been, as I have related above.

I took the place in the coach not to its full extent, but to a place
called Stone, in Cheshire, I think it is, where I not only had no
manner of business, but not so much as the least acquaintance with any
person in the town or near it.  But I knew that with money in the
pocket one is at home anywhere; so I lodged there two or three days,
till, watching my opportunity, I found room in another stage-coach, and
took passage back again for London, sending a letter to my gentleman
that I should be such a certain day at Stony-Stratford, where the
coachman told me he was to lodge.

It happened to be a chance coach that I had taken up, which, having
been hired on purpose to carry some gentlemen to West Chester who were
going for Ireland, was now returning, and did not tie itself to exact
times or places as the stages did; so that, having been obliged to lie
still on Sunday, he had time to get himself ready to come out, which
otherwise he could not have done.

However, his warning was so short, that he could not reach to
Stony-Stratford time enough to be with me at night, but he met me at a
place called Brickhill the next morning, as we were just coming in to
tow.

I confess I was very glad to see him, for I had thought myself a little
disappointed over-night, seeing I had gone so far to contrive my coming
on purpose.  He pleased me doubly too by the figure he came in, for he
brought a very handsome (gentleman's) coach and four horses, with a
servant to attend him.

He took me out of the stage-coach immediately, which stopped at an inn
in Brickhill; and putting into the same inn, he set up his own coach,
and bespoke his dinner.  I asked him what he meant by that, for I was
for going forward with the journey.  He said, No, I had need of a
little rest upon the road, and that was a very good sort of a house,
though it was but a little town; so we would go no farther that night,
whatever came of it.

I did not press him much, for since he had come so to meet me, and put
himself to so much expense, it was but reasonable I should oblige him a
little too; so I was easy as to that point.

After dinner we walked to see the town, to see the church, and to view
the fields, and the country, as is usual for strangers to do; and our
landlord was our guide in going to see the church. I observed my
gentleman inquired pretty much about the parson, and I took the hint
immediately that he certainly would propose to be married; and though
it was a sudden thought, it followed presently, that, in short, I would
not refuse him; for, to be plain, with my circumstances I was in no
condition now to say No; I had no reason now to run any more such
hazards.

But while these thoughts ran round in my head, which was the work but
of a few moments, I observed my landlord took him aside and whispered
to him, though not very softly neither, for so much I overheard:  'Sir,
if you shall have occasion----' the rest I could not hear, but it seems
it was to this purpose:  'Sir, if you shall have occasion for a
minister, I have a friend a little way off that will serve you, and be
as private as you please.' My gentleman answered loud enough for me to
hear, 'Very well, I believe I shall.'

I was no sooner come back to the inn but he fell upon me with
irresistible words, that since he had had the good fortune to meet me,
and everything concurred, it would be hastening his felicity if I would
put an end to the matter just there.  'What do you mean?' says I,
colouring a little.  'What, in an inn, and upon the road!  Bless us
all,' said I, as if I had been surprised, 'how can you talk so?'  'Oh,
I can talk so very well,' says he, 'I came a-purpose to talk so, and
I'll show you that I did'; and with that he pulls out a great bundle of
papers.  'You fright me,' said I; 'what are all these?'  'Don't be
frighted, my dear,' said he, and kissed me.  This was the first time
that he had been so free to call me 'my dear'; then he repeated it,
'Don't be frighted; you shall see what it is all'; then he laid them
all abroad.  There was first the deed or sentence of divorce from his
wife, and the full evidence of her playing the whore; then there were
the certificates of the minister and churchwardens of the parish where
she lived, proving that she was buried, and intimating the manner of
her death; the copy of the coroner's warrant for a jury to sit upon
her, and the verdict of the jury, who brought it in Non compos mentis.
All this was indeed to the purpose, and to give me satisfaction,
though, by the way, I was not so scrupulous, had he known all, but that
I might have taken him without it.  However, I looked them all over as
well as I could, and told him that this was all very clear indeed, but
that he need not have given himself the trouble to have brought them
out with him, for it was time enough.  Well, he said, it might be time
enough for me, but no time but the present time was time enough for him.


