This was a fatal day to the king's affairs, and the risk too much
for any man in his wits to run; we lost 4000 men on the spot, 3000
prisoners, among whom was Sir Charles Lucas, Major-General Porter,
Major-General Tilyard, and about 170 gentlemen of quality. We lost all
our baggage, twenty-five pieces of cannon, 3000 carriages, 150 barrels
of powder, 10,000 arms. The prince got into York with the Earl of
Newcastle, and a great many gentlemen; and 7000 or 8000 of the men, as
well horse as foot.

I had but very coarse treatment in this fight; for returning with the
prince from the pursuit of the right wing, and finding all lost, I
halted with some other officers, to consider what to do. At first we
were for making our retreat in a body, and might have done so well
enough, if we had known what had happened, before we saw ourselves in
the middle of the enemy; for Sir Thomas Fairfax, who had got together
his scattered troops, and joined by some of the left wing, knowing
who we were, charged us with great fury. 'Twas not a time to think of
anything but getting away, or dying upon the spot; the prince kept
on in the front, and Sir Thomas Fairfax by this charge cut off about
three regiments of us from our body; but bending his main strength
at the prince, left us, as it were, behind him, in the middle of the
field of battle. We took this for the only opportunity we could have
to get off, and joining together, we made across the place of battle
in as good order as we could, with our carabines presented. In this
posture we passed by several bodies of the enemy's foot, who stood
with their pikes charged to keep us off; but they had no occasion, for
we had no design to meddle with them, but to get from them.

Thus we made a swift march, and thought ourselves pretty secure; but
our work was not done yet, for on a sudden we saw ourselves under a
necessity of fighting our way through a great body of Manchester's
horse, who came galloping upon us over the moor. They had, as we
suppose, been pursuing some of our broken troops which were fled
before, and seeing us, they gave us a home charge. We received them as
well as we could, but pushed to get through them, which at last we did
with a considerable loss to them. However, we lost so many men, either
killed or separated from us (for all could not follow the same way),
that of our three regiments we could not be above 400 horse together
when we got quite clear, and these were mixed men, some of one troop
and regiment, some of another. Not that I believe many of us were
killed in the last attack, for we had plainly the better of the enemy,
but our design being to get off, some shifted for themselves one way
and some another, in the best manner they could, and as their several
fortunes guided them. Four hundred more of this body, as I afterwards
understood, having broke through the enemy's body another way, kept
together, and got into Pontefract Castle, and 300 more made northward
and to Skipton, where the prince afterwards fetched them off.

These few of us that were left together, with whom I was, being now
pretty clear of pursuit, halted, and began to inquire who and who
we were, and what we should do; and on a short debate, I proposed we
should make to the first garrison of the king's that we could recover,
and that we should keep together, lest the country people should
insult us upon the roads. With this resolution we pushed on westward
for Lancashire, but our misfortunes were not yet at an end. We
travelled very hard, and got to a village upon the river Wharfe, near
Wetherby. At Wetherby there was a bridge, but we understood that a
party from Leeds had secured the town and the post, in order to stop
the flying Cavaliers, and that 'twould be very hard to get through
there, though, as we understood afterwards, there were no soldiers
there but a guard of the townsmen. In this pickle we consulted what
course to take. To stay where we were till morning, we all concluded,
would not be safe. Some advised to take the stream with our horses,
but the river, which is deep, and the current strong, seemed to bid
us have a care what we did of that kind, especially in the night. We
resolved therefore to refresh ourselves and our horses, which indeed
is more than we did, and go on till we might come to a ford or bridge,
where we might get over. Some guides we had, but they either were
foolish or false, for after we had rode eight or nine miles, they
plunged us into a river at a place they called a ford, but 'twas a
very ill one, for most of our horses swam, and seven or eight were
lost, but we saved the men. However, we got all over.

We made bold with our first convenience to trespass upon the country
for a few horses, where we could find them, to remount our men whose
horses were drowned, and continued our march. But being obliged to
refresh ourselves at a small village on the edge of Bramham Moor, we
found the country alarmed by our taking some horses, and we were no
sooner got on horseback in the morning, and entering on the moor, but
we understood we were pursued by some troops of horse. There was
no remedy but we must pass this moor; and though our horses were
exceedingly tired, yet we pressed on upon a round trot, and recovered
an enclosed country on the other side, where we halted. And here,
necessity putting us upon it, we were obliged to look out for more
horses, for several of our men were dismounted, and others' horses
disabled by carrying double, those who lost their horses getting up
behind them. But we were supplied by our enemies against their will.

The enemy followed us over the moor, and we having a woody enclosed
country about us, where we were, I observed by their moving, they had
lost sight of us; upon which I proposed concealing ourselves till we
might judge of their numbers. We did so, and lying close in a wood,
they passed hastily by us, without skirting or searching the wood,
which was what on another occasion they would not have done. I found
they were not above 150 horse, and considering, that to let them
go before us, would be to alarm the country, and stop our design, I
thought, since we might be able to deal with them, we should not meet
with a better place for it, and told the rest of our officers my mind,
which all our party presently (for we had not time for a long debate)
agreed to.

