He was going to reply, and had said that he was sorry I could not be
persuaded, and was a-going to say more, but he heard his sister
a-coming, and so did I; and yet I forced out these few words as a
reply, that I could never be persuaded to love one brother and marry
another.  He shook his head and said, 'Then I am ruined,' meaning
himself; and that moment his sister entered the room and told him she
could not find the flute. 'Well,' says he merrily, 'this laziness won't
do'; so he gets up and goes himself to go to look for it, but comes
back without it too; not but that he could have found it, but because
his mind was a little disturbed, and he had no mind to play; and,
besides, the errand he sent his sister on was answered another way; for
he only wanted an opportunity to speak to me, which he gained, though
not much to his satisfaction.

I had, however, a great deal of satisfaction in having spoken my mind
to him with freedom, and with such an honest plainness, as I have
related; and though it did not at all work the way I desired, that is
to say, to oblige the person to me the more, yet it took from him all
possibility of quitting me but by a downright breach of honour, and
giving up all the faith of a gentleman to me, which he had so often
engaged by, never to abandon me, but to make me his wife as soon as he
came to his estate.

It was not many weeks after this before I was about the house again,
and began to grow well; but I continued melancholy, silent, dull, and
retired, which amazed the whole family, except he that knew the reason
of it; yet it was a great while before he took any notice of it, and I,
as backward to speak as he, carried respectfully to him, but never
offered to speak a word to him that was particular of any kind
whatsoever; and this continued for sixteen or seventeen weeks; so that,
as I expected every day to be dismissed the family, on account of what
distaste they had taken another way, in which I had no guilt, so I
expected to hear no more of this gentleman, after all his solemn vows
and protestations, but to be ruined and abandoned.

At last I broke the way myself in the family for my removing; for being
talking seriously with the old lady one day, about my own circumstances
in the world, and how my distemper had left a heaviness upon my
spirits, that I was not the same thing I was before, the old lady said,
'I am afraid, Betty, what I have said to you about my son has had some
influence upon you, and that you are melancholy on his account; pray,
will you let me know how the matter stands with you both, if it may not
be improper?  For, as for Robin, he does nothing but rally and banter
when I speak of it to him.'  'Why, truly, madam,' said I 'that matter
stands as I wish it did not, and I shall be very sincere with you in
it, whatever befalls me for it.  Mr. Robert has several times proposed
marriage to me, which is what I had no reason to expect, my poor
circumstances considered; but I have always resisted him, and that
perhaps in terms more positive than became me, considering the regard
that I ought to have for every branch of your family; but,' said I,
'madam, I could never so far forget my obligation to you and all your
house, to offer to consent to a thing which I know must needs be
disobliging to you, and this I have made my argument to him, and have
positively told him that I would never entertain a thought of that kind
unless I had your consent, and his father's also, to whom I was bound
by so many invincible obligations.'

'And is this possible, Mrs. Betty?' says the old lady.  'Then you have
been much juster to us than we have been to you; for we have all looked
upon you as a kind of snare to my son, and I had a proposal to make to
you for your removing, for fear of it; but I had not yet mentioned it
to you, because I thought you were not thorough well, and I was afraid
of grieving you too much, lest it should throw you down again; for we
have all a respect for you still, though not so much as to have it be
the ruin of my son; but if it be as you say, we have all wronged you
very much.'

'As to the truth of what I say, madam,' said I, 'refer you to your son
himself; if he will do me any justice, he must tell you the story just
as I have told it.'

Away goes the old lady to her daughters and tells them the whole story,
just as I had told it her; and they were surprised at it, you may be
sure, as I believed they would be.  One said she could never have
thought it; another said Robin was a fool; a third said she would not
believe a word of it, and she would warrant that Robin would tell the
story another way.  But the old gentlewoman, who was resolved to go to
the bottom of it before I could have the least opportunity of
acquainting her son with what had passed, resolved too that she would
talk with her son immediately, and to that purpose sent for him, for he
was gone but to a lawyer's house in the town, upon some petty business
of his own, and upon her sending he returned immediately.

Upon his coming up to them, for they were all still together, 'Sit
down, Robin,' says the old lady, 'I must have some talk with you.'
'With all my heart, madam,' says Robin, looking very merry.  'I hope it
is about a good wife, for I am at a great loss in that affair.'  'How
can that be?' says his mother; 'did not you say you resolved to have
Mrs. Betty?'  'Ay, madam,' says Robin, 'but there is one has forbid the
banns.'  'Forbid, the banns!' says his mother; 'who can that be?' 'Even
Mrs. Betty herself,' says Robin.  'How so?' says his mother.  'Have you
asked her the question, then?'  'Yes, indeed, madam,' says Robin.  'I
have attacked her in form five times since she was sick, and am beaten
off; the jade is so stout she won't capitulate nor yield upon any
terms, except such as I cannot effectually grant.' 'Explain yourself,'
says the mother, 'for I am surprised; I do not understand you.  I hope
you are not in earnest.'

'Why, madam,' says he, 'the case is plain enough upon me, it explains
itself; she won't have me, she says; is not that plain enough?  I think
'tis plain, and pretty rough too.'  'Well, but,' says the mother, 'you
talk of conditions that you cannot grant; what does she want--a
settlement?  Her jointure ought to be according to her portion; but
what fortune does she bring you?' 'Nay, as to fortune,' says Robin,
'she is rich enough; I am satisfied in that point; but 'tis I that am
not able to come up to her terms, and she is positive she will not have
me without.'

Here the sisters put in.  'Madam,' says the second sister, ''tis
impossible to be serious with him; he will never give a direct answer
to anything; you had better let him alone, and talk no more of it to
him; you know how to dispose of her out of his way if you thought there
was anything in it.'  Robin was a little warmed with his sister's
rudeness, but he was even with her, and yet with good manners too.
'There are two sorts of people, madam,' says he, turning to his mother,
'that there is no contending with; that is, a wise body and a fool;
'tis a little hard I should engage with both of them together.'


