My attorney gave me notice to come to this meeting in good clothes, and
with some state, that the mercer might see I was something more than I
seemed to be that time they had me.  Accordingly I came in a new suit
of second mourning, according to what I had said at the justice's.  I
set myself out, too, as well as a widow's dress in second mourning
would admit; my governess also furnished me with a good pearl necklace,
that shut in behind with a locket of diamonds, which she had in pawn;
and I had a very good figure; and as I stayed till I was sure they were
come, I came in a coach to the door, with my maid with me.

When I came into the room the mercer was surprised.  He stood up and
made his bow, which I took a little notice of, and but a little, and
went and sat down where my own attorney had pointed to me to sit, for
it was his house.  After a little while the mercer said, he did not
know me again, and began to make some compliments his way.  I told him,
I believed he did not know me at first, and that if he had, I believed
he would not have treated me as he did.

He told me he was very sorry for what had happened, and that it was to
testify the willingness he had to make all possible reparation that he
had appointed this meeting; that he hoped I would not carry things to
extremity, which might be not only too great a loss to him, but might
be the ruin of his business and shop, in which case I might have the
satisfaction of repaying an injury with an injury ten times greater;
but that I would then get nothing, whereas he was willing to do me any
justice that was in his power, without putting himself or me to the
trouble or charge of a suit at law.

I told him I was glad to hear him talk so much more like a man of sense
than he did before; that it was true, acknowledgment in most cases of
affronts was counted reparation sufficient; but this had gone too far
to be made up so; that I was not revengeful, nor did I seek his ruin,
or any man's else, but that all my friends were unanimous not to let me
so far neglect my character as to adjust a thing of this kind without a
sufficient reparation of honour; that to be taken up for a thief was
such an indignity as could not be put up; that my character was above
being treated so by any that knew me, but because in my condition of a
widow I had been for some time careless of  myself, and negligent of
myself, I might be taken for such a creature, but that for the
particular usage I had from him afterwards,--and then I repeated all as
before; it was so provoking I had scarce patience to repeat it.

Well, he acknowledged all, and was might humble indeed; he made
proposals very handsome; he came up to #100 and to pay all the law
charges, and added that he would make me a present of a very good suit
of clothes.  I came down to #300, and I demanded that I should publish
an advertisement of the particulars in the common newspapers.

This was a clause he never could comply with.  However, at last he came
up, by good management of my attorney, to #150 and a suit of black silk
clothes; and there I agree, and as it were, at my attorney's request,
complied with it, he paying my attorney's bill and charges, and gave us
a good supper into the bargain.


When I came to receive the money, I brought my governess with me,
dressed like an old duchess, and a gentleman very well dressed, who we
pretended courted me, but I called him cousin, and the lawyer was only
to hint privately to him that his gentleman courted the widow.

He treated us handsomely indeed, and paid the money cheerfully enough;
so that it cost him #200 in all, or rather more.  At our last meeting,
when all was agreed, the case of the journeyman came up, and the mercer
begged very hard for him; told me he was a man that had kept a shop of
his own, and been in good business, had a wife, and several children,
and was very poor; that he had nothing to make satisfaction with, but
he should come to beg my pardon on his knees, if I desired it, as
openly as I pleased.  I had no spleen at the saucy rogue, nor were his
submissions anything to me, since there was nothing to be got by him,
so I thought it was as good to throw that in generously as not; so I
told him I did not desire the ruin of any man, and therefore at his
request I would forgive the wretch; it was below me to seek any revenge.

When we were at supper he brought the poor fellow in to make
acknowledgment, which he would have done with as much mean humility as
his offence was with insulting haughtiness and pride, in which he was
an instance of a complete baseness of spirit, impious, cruel, and
relentless when uppermost and in prosperity, abject and low-spirited
when down in affliction.  However, I abated his cringes, told him I
forgave him, and desired he might withdraw, as if I did not care for
the sight of him, though I had forgiven him.

I was now in good circumstances indeed, if I could have known my time
for leaving off, and my governess often said I was the richest of the
trade in England; and so I believe I was, for I had #700 by me in
money, besides clothes, rings, some plate, and two gold watches, and
all of them stolen, for I had innumerable jobs besides these I have
mentioned.  Oh!  had I even now had the grace of  repentance, I had
still leisure to have looked back upon my follies, and have made some
reparation; but the satisfaction I was to make for the public mischiefs
I had done was yet left behind; and I could not forbear going abroad
again, as I called it now, than any more I could when my extremity
really drove me out for bread.


