The other creature, frighted with the flash of fire and the noise of the
gun, swam on shore, and ran up directly to the mountains from whence they
came; nor could I, at that distance, know what it was.  I found quickly
the negroes wished to eat the flesh of this creature, so I was willing to
have them take it as a favour from me; which, when I made signs to them
that they might take him, they were very thankful for.  Immediately they
fell to work with him; and though they had no knife, yet, with a
sharpened piece of wood, they took off his skin as readily, and much more
readily, than we could have done with a knife.  They offered me some of
the flesh, which I declined, pointing out that I would give it them; but
made signs for the skin, which they gave me very freely, and brought me a
great deal more of their provisions, which, though I did not understand,
yet I accepted.  I then made signs to them for some water, and held out
one of my jars to them, turning it bottom upward, to show that it was
empty, and that I wanted to have it filled.  They called immediately to
some of their friends, and there came two women, and brought a great
vessel made of earth, and burnt, as I supposed, in the sun, this they set
down to me, as before, and I sent Xury on shore with my jars, and filled
them all three.  The women were as naked as the men.

I was now furnished with roots and corn, such as it was, and water; and
leaving my friendly negroes, I made forward for about eleven days more,
without offering to go near the shore, till I saw the land run out a
great length into the sea, at about the distance of four or five leagues
before me; and the sea being very calm, I kept a large offing to make
this point.  At length, doubling the point, at about two leagues from the
land, I saw plainly land on the other side, to seaward; then I concluded,
as it was most certain indeed, that this was the Cape de Verde, and those
the islands called, from thence, Cape de Verde Islands.  However, they
were at a great distance, and I could not well tell what I had best to
do; for if I should be taken with a fresh of wind, I might neither reach
one or other.

In this dilemma, as I was very pensive, I stepped into the cabin and sat
down, Xury having the helm; when, on a sudden, the boy cried out,
“Master, master, a ship with a sail!” and the foolish boy was frighted
out of his wits, thinking it must needs be some of his master’s ships
sent to pursue us, but I knew we were far enough out of their reach.  I
jumped out of the cabin, and immediately saw, not only the ship, but that
it was a Portuguese ship; and, as I thought, was bound to the coast of
Guinea, for negroes.  But, when I observed the course she steered, I was
soon convinced they were bound some other way, and did not design to come
any nearer to the shore; upon which I stretched out to sea as much as I
could, resolving to speak with them if possible.

With all the sail I could make, I found I should not be able to come in
their way, but that they would be gone by before I could make any signal
to them: but after I had crowded to the utmost, and began to despair,
they, it seems, saw by the help of their glasses that it was some
European boat, which they supposed must belong to some ship that was
lost; so they shortened sail to let me come up.  I was encouraged with
this, and as I had my patron’s ancient on board, I made a waft of it to
them, for a signal of distress, and fired a gun, both which they saw; for
they told me they saw the smoke, though they did not hear the gun.  Upon
these signals they very kindly brought to, and lay by for me; and in
about three hours; time I came up with them.

They asked me what I was, in Portuguese, and in Spanish, and in French,
but I understood none of them; but at last a Scotch sailor, who was on
board, called to me: and I answered him, and told him I was an
Englishman, that I had made my escape out of slavery from the Moors, at
Sallee; they then bade me come on board, and very kindly took me in, and
all my goods.

It was an inexpressible joy to me, which any one will believe, that I was
thus delivered, as I esteemed it, from such a miserable and almost
hopeless condition as I was in; and I immediately offered all I had to
the captain of the ship, as a return for my deliverance; but he
generously told me he would take nothing from me, but that all I had
should be delivered safe to me when I came to the Brazils.  “For,” says
he, “I have saved your life on no other terms than I would be glad to be
saved myself: and it may, one time or other, be my lot to be taken up in
the same condition.  Besides,” said he, “when I carry you to the Brazils,
so great a way from your own country, if I should take from you what you
have, you will be starved there, and then I only take away that life I
have given.  No, no,” says he: “Seignior Inglese” (Mr. Englishman), “I
will carry you thither in charity, and those things will help to buy your
subsistence there, and your passage home again.”

As he was charitable in this proposal, so he was just in the performance
to a tittle; for he ordered the seamen that none should touch anything
that I had: then he took everything into his own possession, and gave me
back an exact inventory of them, that I might have them, even to my three
earthen jars.

As to my boat, it was a very good one; and that he saw, and told me he
would buy it of me for his ship’s use; and asked me what I would have for
it?  I told him he had been so generous to me in everything that I could
not offer to make any price of the boat, but left it entirely to him:
upon which he told me he would give me a note of hand to pay me eighty
pieces of eight for it at Brazil; and when it came there, if any one
offered to give more, he would make it up.  He offered me also sixty
pieces of eight more for my boy Xury, which I was loth to take; not that
I was unwilling to let the captain have him, but I was very loth to sell
the poor boy’s liberty, who had assisted me so faithfully in procuring my
own.  However, when I let him know my reason, he owned it to be just, and
offered me this medium, that he would give the boy an obligation to set
him free in ten years, if he turned Christian: upon this, and Xury saying
he was willing to go to him, I let the captain have him.

We had a very good voyage to the Brazils, and I arrived in the Bay de
Todos los Santos, or All Saints’ Bay, in about twenty-two days after.
And now I was once more delivered from the most miserable of all
conditions of life; and what to do next with myself I was to consider.

The generous treatment the captain gave me I can never enough remember:
he would take nothing of me for my passage, gave me twenty ducats for the
leopard’s skin, and forty for the lion’s skin, which I had in my boat,
and caused everything I had in the ship to be punctually delivered to me;
and what I was willing to sell he bought of me, such as the case of
bottles, two of my guns, and a piece of the lump of beeswax—for I had
made candles of the rest: in a word, I made about two hundred and twenty
pieces of eight of all my cargo; and with this stock I went on shore in
the Brazils.

I had not been long here before I was recommended to the house of a good
honest man like himself, who had an _ingenio_, as they call it (that is,
a plantation and a sugar-house).  I lived with him some time, and
acquainted myself by that means with the manner of planting and making of
sugar; and seeing how well the planters lived, and how they got rich
suddenly, I resolved, if I could get a licence to settle there, I would
turn planter among them: resolving in the meantime to find out some way
to get my money, which I had left in London, remitted to me.  To this
purpose, getting a kind of letter of naturalisation, I purchased as much
land that was uncured as my money would reach, and formed a plan for my
plantation and settlement; such a one as might be suitable to the stock
which I proposed to myself to receive from England.


