He went out of the room slowly. Neither Mr. Henchy nor the old man said
anything, but, just as the door was closing, Mr. O'Connor, who had been
staring moodily into the fire, called out suddenly:

"'Bye, Joe."

Mr. Henchy waited a few moments and then nodded in the direction of the
door.

"Tell me," he said across the fire, "what brings our friend in here?
What does he want?"

"'Usha, poor Joe!" said Mr. O'Connor, throwing the end of his cigarette
into the fire, "he's hard up, like the rest of us."

Mr. Henchy snuffled vigorously and spat so copiously that he nearly put
out the fire, which uttered a hissing protest.

"To tell you my private and candid opinion," he said, "I think he's a
man from the other camp. He's a spy of Colgan's, if you ask me. Just go
round and try and find out how they're getting on. They won't suspect
you. Do you twig?"

"Ah, poor Joe is a decent skin," said Mr. O'Connor.

"His father was a decent, respectable man," Mr. Henchy admitted. "Poor
old Larry Hynes! Many a good turn he did in his day! But I'm greatly
afraid our friend is not nineteen carat. Damn it, I can understand a
fellow being hard up, but what I can't understand is a fellow sponging.
Couldn't he have some spark of manhood about him?"

"He doesn't get a warm welcome from me when he comes," said the old man.
"Let him work for his own side and not come spying around here."

"I don't know," said Mr. O'Connor dubiously, as he took out
cigarette-papers and tobacco. "I think Joe Hynes is a straight man.
He's a clever chap, too, with the pen. Do you remember that thing he
wrote...?"

"Some of these hillsiders and fenians are a bit too clever if ask me,"
said Mr. Henchy. "Do you know what my private and candid opinion is
about some of those little jokers? I believe half of them are in the pay
of the Castle."

"There's no knowing," said the old man.

"O, but I know it for a fact," said Mr. Henchy. "They're Castle
hacks.... I don't say Hynes.... No, damn it, I think he's a stroke above
that.... But there's a certain little nobleman with a cock-eye--you know
the patriot I'm alluding to?"

Mr. O'Connor nodded.

"There's a lineal descendant of Major Sirr for you if you like! O, the
heart's blood of a patriot! That's a fellow now that'd sell his country
for fourpence--ay--and go down on his bended knees and thank the
Almighty Christ he had a country to sell."

There was a knock at the door.

"Come in!" said Mr. Henchy.

A person resembling a poor clergyman or a poor actor appeared in the
doorway. His black clothes were tightly buttoned on his short body
and it was impossible to say whether he wore a clergyman's collar or
a layman's, because the collar of his shabby frock-coat, the uncovered
buttons of which reflected the candlelight, was turned up about his
neck. He wore a round hat of hard black felt. His face, shining with
raindrops, had the appearance of damp yellow cheese save where two rosy
spots indicated the cheekbones. He opened his very long mouth suddenly
to express disappointment and at the same time opened wide his very
bright blue eyes to express pleasure and surprise.

"O Father Keon!" said Mr. Henchy, jumping up from his chair. "Is that
you? Come in!"

"O, no, no, no!" said Father Keon quickly, pursing his lips as if he
were addressing a child.

"Won't you come in and sit down?"

"No, no, no!" said Father Keon, speaking in a discreet, indulgent,
velvety voice. "Don't let me disturb you now! I'm just looking for Mr.
Fanning...."

"He's round at the Black Eagle," said Mr. Henchy. "But won't you come in
and sit down a minute?"

"No, no, thank you. It was just a little business matter," said Father
Keon. "Thank you, indeed."

He retreated from the doorway and Mr. Henchy, seizing one of the
candlesticks, went to the door to light him downstairs.

"O, don't trouble, I beg!"

"No, but the stairs is so dark."

"No, no, I can see.... Thank you, indeed."

"Are you right now?"

"All right, thanks.... Thanks."

Mr. Henchy returned with the candlestick and put it on the table. He sat
down again at the fire. There was silence for a few moments.

"Tell me, John," said Mr. O'Connor, lighting his cigarette with another
pasteboard card.

"Hm?"

"What he is exactly?"

"Ask me an easier one," said Mr. Henchy.

"Fanning and himself seem to me very thick. They're often in Kavanagh's
together. Is he a priest at all?"

"Mmmyes, I believe so.... I think he's what you call black sheep.
We haven't many of them, thank God! but we have a few.... He's an
unfortunate man of some kind...."

"And how does he knock it out?" asked Mr. O'Connor.

"That's another mystery."

"Is he attached to any chapel or church or institution or---"

"No," said Mr. Henchy, "I think he's travelling on his own account....
God forgive me," he added, "I thought he was the dozen of stout."

"Is there any chance of a drink itself?" asked Mr. O'Connor.

"I'm dry too," said the old man.

"I asked that little shoeboy three times," said Mr. Henchy, "would he
send up a dozen of stout. I asked him again now, but he was leaning
on the counter in his shirt-sleeves having a deep goster with Alderman
Cowley."

"Why didn't you remind him?" said Mr. O'Connor.


