"London!" said Ignatius Gallaher. "It's six of one and half-a-dozen of
the other. You ask Hogan, my boy. I showed him a bit about London when
he was over there. He'd open your eye.... I say, Tommy, don't make punch
of that whisky: liquor up."

"No, really...."

"O, come on, another one won't do you any harm. What is it? The same
again, I suppose?"

"Well... all right."

"Francois, the same again.... Will you smoke, Tommy?"

Ignatius Gallaher produced his cigar-case. The two friends lit their
cigars and puffed at them in silence until their drinks were served.

"I'll tell you my opinion," said Ignatius Gallaher, emerging after some
time from the clouds of smoke in which he had taken refuge, "it's a rum
world. Talk of immorality! I've heard of cases--what am I saying?--I've
known them: cases of... immorality...."

Ignatius Gallaher puffed thoughtfully at his cigar and then, in a calm
historian's tone, he proceeded to sketch for his friend some pictures
of the corruption which was rife abroad. He summarised the vices of many
capitals and seemed inclined to award the palm to Berlin. Some things he
could not vouch for (his friends had told him), but of others he had had
personal experience. He spared neither rank nor caste. He revealed many
of the secrets of religious houses on the Continent and described some
of the practices which were fashionable in high society and ended by
telling, with details, a story about an English duchess--a story which
he knew to be true. Little Chandler as astonished.

"Ah, well," said Ignatius Gallaher, "here we are in old jog-along Dublin
where nothing is known of such things."

"How dull you must find it," said Little Chandler, "after all the other
places you've seen!"

"Well," said Ignatius Gallaher, "it's a relaxation to come over here,
you know. And, after all, it's the old country, as they say, isn't it?
You can't help having a certain feeling for it. That's human nature....
But tell me something about yourself. Hogan told me you had... tasted
the joys of connubial bliss. Two years ago, wasn't it?"

Little Chandler blushed and smiled.

"Yes," he said. "I was married last May twelve months."

"I hope it's not too late in the day to offer my best wishes," said
Ignatius Gallaher. "I didn't know your address or I'd have done so at
the time."

He extended his hand, which Little Chandler took.

"Well, Tommy," he said, "I wish you and yours every joy in life, old
chap, and tons of money, and may you never die till I shoot you. And
that's the wish of a sincere friend, an old friend. You know that?"

"I know that," said Little Chandler.

"Any youngsters?" said Ignatius Gallaher.

Little Chandler blushed again.

"We have one child," he said.

"Son or daughter?"

"A little boy."

Ignatius Gallaher slapped his friend sonorously on the back.

"Bravo," he said, "I wouldn't doubt you, Tommy."

Little Chandler smiled, looked confusedly at his glass and bit his lower
lip with three childishly white front teeth.

"I hope you'll spend an evening with us," he said, "before you go
back. My wife will be delighted to meet you. We can have a little music
and----"

"Thanks awfully, old chap," said Ignatius Gallaher, "I'm sorry we didn't
meet earlier. But I must leave tomorrow night."


