With the young men there seemed almost always some matter of diversion or
business on hand, that afforded a constant variety of enjoyment. But
whether fishing, or carving canoes, or polishing their ornaments, never
was there exhibited the least sign of strife or contention among them.

As for the warriors, they maintained a tranquil dignity of demeanour,
journeying occasionally from house to house, where they were always sure
to be received with the attention bestowed upon distinguished guests. The
old men, of whom there were many in the vale, seldom stirred from their
mats, where they would recline for hours and hours, smoking and talking to
one another with all the garrulity of age.

But the continual happiness which, so far as I was able to judge, appeared
to prevail in the valley, sprung principally from that all-pervading
sensation which Rousseau has told us he at one time experienced, the mere
buoyant sense of a healthful physical existence. And, indeed, in this
particular the Typees had ample reason to felicitate themselves, for
sickness was almost unknown. During the whole period of my stay, I saw but
one invalid among them; and on their smooth clear skins you observed no
blemish or mark of disease.

The general repose, however, upon which I have just been descanting, was
broken in upon about this time by an event, which proved that the
islanders were not entirely exempt from those occurrences which disturb
the quiet of more civilized communities.

Having now been a considerable time in the valley, I began to feel
surprised that the violent hostility subsisting between its inhabitants
and those of the adjoining bay of Happar, should never have manifested
itself in any warlike encounter. Although the valiant Typees would often,
by gesticulations, declare their undying hatred against their enemies, and
the disgust they felt at their cannibal propensities; although they
dilated upon the manifold injuries they had received at their hands, yet,
with a forbearance truly commendable, they appeared patiently to sit down
under their grievances, and to refrain from making any reprisals. The
Happars, entrenched behind their mountains, and never even showing
themselves on their summits, did not appear to me to furnish adequate
cause for that excess of animosity evinced towards them by the heroic
tenants of our vale, and I was inclined to believe that the deeds of blood
attributed to them had been greatly exaggerated.

On the other hand, as the clamours of war had not up to this period
disturbed the serenity of the tribe, I began to distrust the truth of
those reports which ascribed so fierce and belligerent a character to the
Typee nation. Surely, thought I, all these terrible stories I have heard
about the inveteracy with which they carried on the feud, their deadly
intensity of hatred, and the diabolical malice with which they glutted
their revenge upon the inanimate forms of the slain, are nothing more than
fables, and I must confess that I experienced something like a sense of
regret at having my hideous anticipations thus disappointed. I felt in
some sort like a ’prentice boy who, going to the play in the expectation
of being delighted with a cut-and-thrust tragedy, is almost moved to tears
of disappointment at the exhibition of a genteel comedy.

I could not avoid thinking that I had fallen in with a greatly traduced
people, and I moralized not a little upon the disadvantage of having a bad
name, which in this instance had given a tribe of savages, who were as
pacific as so many lambkins, the reputation of a confederacy of
giant-killers.

But subsequent events proved that I had been a little too premature in
coming to this conclusion. One day, about noon, happening to be at the Ti,
I had lain down on the mats with several of the chiefs, and had gradually
sunk into a most luxurious siesta, when I was awakened by a tremendous
outcry, and starting up, beheld the natives, seizing their spears and
hurrying out, while the most puissant of the chiefs, grasping the six
muskets which were ranged against the bamboos, followed after, and soon
disappeared in the groves. These movements were accompanied by wild
shouts, in which “Happar, Happar,” greatly predominated. The islanders
were now to be seen running past the Ti, and striking across the valley to
the Happar side. Presently I heard the sharp report of a musket from the
adjoining hills, and then a burst of voices in the same direction. At this
the women, who had congregated in the groves, set up the most violent
clamours, as they invariably do here as elsewhere on every occasion of
excitement and alarm, with a view of tranquillizing their own minds and
disturbing other people. On this particular occasion they made such an
outrageous noise, and continued it with such perseverance, that for
awhile, had entire volleys of musketry been fired off in the neighbouring
mountains, I should not have been able to have heard them.

When this female commotion had a little subsided I listened eagerly for
further information. At last bang went another shot, and then a second
volley of yells from the hills. Again all was quiet, and continued so for
such a length of time that I began to think the contending armies had
agreed upon a suspension of hostilities; when pop went a third gun,
followed as before with a yell. After this, for nearly two hours nothing
occurred worthy of comment, save some straggling shouts from the hillside,
sounding like the halloos of a parcel of truant boys who had lost
themselves in the woods.

During this interval I had remained standing on the piazza of the “Ti,”
which directly fronted the Happar mountain, and with no one near me but
Kory-Kory and the old superannuated savages I have before described. These
latter never stirred from their mats, and seemed altogether unconscious
that anything unusual was going on.

As for Kory-Kory, he appeared to think that we were in the midst of great
events, and sought most zealously to impress me with a due sense of their
importance. Every sound that reached us conveyed some momentous item of
intelligence to him. At such times, as if he were gifted with second
sight, he would go through a variety of pantomimic illustrations, showing
me the precise manner in which the redoubtable Typees were at that very
moment chastising the insolence of the enemy. “Mehevi hanna pippee nuee
Happar,” he exclaimed every five minutes, giving me to understand that
under that distinguished captain the warriors of his nation were
performing prodigies of valour.

Having heard only four reports from the muskets, I was led to believe that
they were worked by the islanders in the same manner as the Sultan
Solyman’s ponderous artillery at the siege of Byzantium, one of them
taking an hour or two to load and train. At last, no sound whatever
proceeding from the mountains, I concluded that the contest had been
determined one way or the other. Such appeared, indeed, to be the case,
for in a little while a courier arrived at the “Ti,” almost breathless
with his exertions, and communicated the news of a great victory having
been achieved by his countrymen: “Happar poo arva!—Happar poo arva!” (the
cowards had fled). Kory-Kory was in ecstasies, and commenced a vehement
harangue, which, so far as I understood it, implied that the result
exactly agreed with his expectations, and which, moreover, was intended to
convince me that it would be a perfectly useless undertaking, even for an
army of fire-eaters, to offer battle to the irresistible heroes of our
valley. In all this I of course acquiesced, and looked forward with no
little interest to the return of the conquerors, whose victory I feared
might not have been purchased without cost to themselves.


