But however this might be, the scene which had just occurred admonished me
of the danger of trifling with the wayward and passionate spirits against
whom it was vain to struggle, and might even be fatal to do so. My only
hope was to induce the natives to believe that I was reconciled to my
detention in the valley, and by assuming a tranquil and cheerful
demeanour, to allay the suspicions which I had so unfortunately aroused.
Their confidence revived, they might in a short time remit in some degree
their watchfulness over my movements, and I should then be the better
enabled to avail myself of any opportunity which presented itself for
escape. I determined, therefore, to make the best of a bad bargain, and to
bear up manfully against whatever might betide. In this endeavour I
succeeded beyond my own expectations. At the period of Marnoo’s visit, I
had been in the valley, as nearly as I could conjecture, some two months.
Although not completely recovered from my strange illness, which still
lingered about me, I was free from pain and able to take exercise. In
short, I had every reason to anticipate a perfect recovery. Freed from
apprehensions on this point, and resolved to regard the future without
flinching, I flung myself anew into all the social pleasures of the
valley, and sought to bury all regrets, and all remembrances of my
previous existence, in the wild enjoyments it afforded.

In my various wanderings through the vale, and as I became better
acquainted with the character of its inhabitants, I was more and more
struck with the light-hearted joyousness that everywhere prevailed. The
minds of these simple savages, unoccupied by matters of graver moment,
were capable of deriving the utmost delight from circumstances which would
have passed unnoticed in more intelligent communities. All their
enjoyment, indeed, seemed to be made up of the little trifling incidents
of the passing hour; but these diminutive items swelled altogether to an
amount of happiness seldom experienced by more enlightened individuals,
whose pleasures are drawn from more elevated but rarer sources.

What community, for instance, of refined and intellectual mortals would
derive the least satisfaction from shooting pop-guns? The mere supposition
of such a thing being possible would excite their indignation, and yet the
whole population of Typee did little else for ten days but occupy
themselves with that childish amusement, fairly screaming, too, with the
delight it afforded them.

One day I was frolicking with a little spirited urchin, some six years
old, who chased me with a piece of bamboo about three feet long, with
which he occasionally belaboured me. Seizing the stick from him, the idea
happened to suggest itself, that I might make for the youngster, out of
the slender tube, one of those nursery muskets with which I had sometimes
seen children playing. Accordingly, with my knife, I made two parallel
slits in the cane several inches in length, and cutting loose at one end
the elastic strip between them, bent it back and slipped the point into a
little notch made for the purpose. Any small substance placed against this
would be projected with considerable force through the tube by merely
springing the bent strip out of the notch.

Had I possessed the remotest idea of the sensation this piece of ordnance
was destined to produce, I should certainly have taken out a patent for
the invention. The boy scampered away with it, half delirious with
ecstasy, and twenty minutes afterwards I might have been seen surrounded
by a noisy crowd—venerable old greybeards—responsible fathers of
families—valiant warriors—matrons—young men—girls and children, all
holding in their hands bits of bamboo, and each clamouring to be served
first.

For three or four hours I was engaged in manufacturing pop-guns, but at
last made over my good-will and interests in the concern to a lad of
remarkably quick parts, whom I soon initiated into the art and mystery.

Pop, Pop, Pop, Pop, now resounded all over the valley. Duels, skirmishes,
pitched battles, and general engagements were to be seen on every side.
Here, as you walked along a path which led through a thicket, you fell
into a cunningly-laid ambush, and became a target for a body of
musketeers, whose tattooed limbs you could just see peeping into view
through the foliage. There, you were assailed by the intrepid garrison of
a house, who levelled their bamboo rifles at you from between the upright
canes which composed its sides. Farther on, you were fired upon by a
detachment of sharpshooters, mounted upon the top of a pi-pi.

Pop, Pop, Pop, Pop! green guavas, seeds, and berries were flying about in
every direction, and during this dangerous state of affairs, I was half
afraid that, like the man and his brazen bull, I should fall a victim to
my own ingenuity. Like everything else, however, the excitement gradually
wore away, though ever after occasionally pop-guns might be heard at all
hours of the day.

It was towards the close of the pop-gun war, that I was infinitely
diverted with a strange freak of Marheyo’s.

I had worn, when I quitted the ship, a pair of thick pumps, which, from
the rough usage they had received in scaling precipices and sliding down
gorges, were so dilapidated as to be altogether unfit for use—so, at
least, would have thought the generality of people, and so they most
certainly were, when considered in the light of shoes. But things
unserviceable in one way, may with advantage be applied in another—that
is, if one has genius enough for the purpose. This genius Marheyo
possessed in a superlative degree, as he abundantly evinced by the use to
which he put these sorely bruised and battered old shoes.

Every article, however trivial, which belonged to me, the natives appeared
to regard as sacred; and I observed that for several days after becoming
an inmate of the house, my pumps were suffered to remain, untouched, where
I had first happened to throw them. I remembered, however, that after
awhile I had missed them from their accustomed place; but the matter gave
me no concern, supposing that Tinor—like any other tidy housewife, having
come across them in some of her domestic occupations—had pitched the
useless things out of the house. But I was soon undeceived.

One day I observed old Marheyo bustling about me with unusual activity,
and to such a degree as almost to supersede Kory-Kory in the functions of
his office. One moment he volunteered to trot off with me on his back to
the stream; and when I refused, noways daunted by the repulse, he
continued to frisk about me like a superannuated house-dog. I could not
for the life of me conjecture what possessed the old gentleman, until all
at once, availing himself of the temporary absence of the household, he
went through a variety of uncouth gestures, pointing eagerly down to my
feet, and then up to a little bundle which swung from the ridge-pole
overhead. At last I caught a faint idea of his meaning, and motioned him
to lower the package. He executed the order in the twinkling of an eye,
and unrolling a piece of tappa, displayed to my astonished gaze the
identical pumps which I thought had been destroyed long before.

