In the first place he gives Moa Artua an affectionate hug, then
caressingly lays him to his breast, and, finally, whispers something in
his ear, the rest of the company listening eagerly for a reply. But the
baby-god is deaf or dumb,—perhaps both, for never a word does he utter. At
last Kolory speaks a little louder, and soon growing angry, comes boldly
out with what he has to say, and bawls to him. He put me in mind of a
choleric fellow, who, after trying in vain to communicate a secret to a
deaf man, all at once flies into a passion and screams it out so that
every one may hear. Still Moa Artua remains as quiet as ever, and Kolory,
seemingly losing his temper, fetches him a box over the head, strips him
of his tappa and red cloth, and, laying him in a state of nudity in a
little trough, covers him from sight. At this proceeding all present
loudly applaud, and signify their approval by uttering the adjective
“motarkee” with violent emphasis. Kolory, however, is so desirous his
conduct should meet with unqualified approbation, that he inquires of each
individual separately whether, under existing circumstances, he has not
done perfectly right in shutting up Moa Artua. The invariable response is
“Aa, Aa” (yes, yes), repeated over again and again in a manner which ought
to quiet the scruples of the most conscientious. After a few moments
Kolory brings forth his doll again, and, while arraying it very carefully
in the tappa and red cloth, alternately fondles and chides it. The toilet
being completed, he once more speaks to it aloud. The whole company
hereupon show the greatest interest; while the priest, holding Moa Artua
to his ear, interprets to them what he pretends the god is confidentially
communicating to him. Some items of intelligence appear to tickle all
present amazingly; for one claps his hands in a rapture; another shouts
with merriment; and a third leaps to his feet and capers about like a
madman.

What under the sun Moa Artua on these occasions had to say to Kolory I
never could find out; but I could not help thinking that the former showed
a sad want of spirit in being disciplined into making those disclosures,
which at first he seemed bent on withholding. Whether the priest honestly
interpreted what he believed the divinity said to him, or whether he was
not all the while guilty of a vile humbug, I shall not presume to decide.
At any rate, whatever, as coming from the god, was imparted to those
present, seemed to be generally of a complimentary nature—a fact which
illustrates the sagacity of Kolory, or else the time-serving disposition
of this hardly-used deity.

Moa Artua having nothing more to say, his bearer goes to nursing him
again, in which occupation, however, he is soon interrupted by a question
put by one of the warriors to the god. Kolory hereupon snatches it up to
his ear again, and after listening attentively, once more officiates as
the organ of communication. A multitude of questions and answers having
passed between the parties, much to the satisfaction of those who propose
them, the god is put tenderly to bed in the trough, and the whole company
unite in a long chant, led off by Kolory. This ended, the ceremony is
over; the chiefs rise to their feet in high good humour, and my Lord
Archbishop, after chatting awhile, and regaling himself with a whiff or
two from a pipe of tobacco, tucks the canoe under his arm and marches off
with it.

The whole of these proceedings were like those of a parcel of children
playing with dolls and baby-houses.

For a youngster scarcely ten inches high, and with so few early advantages
as he doubtless had had, Moa Artua was certainly a precocious little
fellow, if he really said all that was imputed to him; but for what reason
this poor devil of a deity, thus cuffed about, cajoled, and shut up in a
box, was held in greater estimation than the full-grown and dignified
personages of the Taboo Groves, I cannot divine. And yet Mehevi, and other
chiefs of unquestionable veracity—to say nothing of the Primate
himself—assured me over and over again that Moa Artua was the tutelary
deity of Typee, and was more to be held in honour than a whole battalion
of the clumsy idols in the Hoolah Hoolah grounds. Kory-Kory—who seemed to
have devoted considerable attention to the study of theology, as he knew
the names of all the graven images in the valley, and often repeated them
over to me—likewise entertained some rather enlarged ideas with regard to
the character and pretensions of Moa Artua. He once gave me to understand,
with a gesture there was no misconceiving, that if he (Moa Artua) were so
minded, he could cause a cocoa-nut tree to sprout out of his (Kory-Kory’s)
head; and that it would be the easiest thing in life for him (Moa Artua)
to take the whole island of Nukuheva in his mouth, and dive down to the
bottom of the sea with it.

But, in sober seriousness, I hardly knew what to make of the religion of
the valley. There was nothing that so much perplexed the illustrious Cook,
in his intercourse with the South Sea islanders, as their sacred rites.
Although this prince of navigators was in many instances assisted by
interpreters in the prosecution of his researches, he still frankly
acknowledges that he was at a loss to obtain anything like a clear insight
into the puzzling arcana of their faith. A similar admission has been made
by other eminent voyagers,—by Carteret, Byron, Kotzebue, and Vancouver.

For my own part, although hardly a day passed while I remained upon the
island that I did not witness some religious ceremony or other, it was
very much like seeing a parcel of “Freemasons” making secret signs to each
other: I saw everything, but could comprehend nothing.

