The motive which prompts the introduction of chaplains into the Navy
cannot but be warmly responded to by every Christian. But it does not
follow, that because chaplains are to be found in men-of-war, that,
under the present system, they achieve much good, or that, under any
other, they ever will.

How can it be expected that the religion of peace should flourish in an
oaken castle of war? How can it be expected that the clergyman, whose
pulpit is a forty-two-pounder, should convert sinners to a faith that
enjoins them to turn the right cheek when the left is smitten? How is
it to be expected that when, according to the XLII. of the Articles of
War, as they now stand unrepealed on the Statute-book, "a bounty shall
be paid" (to the officers and crew) "by the United States government of
$20 for each person on board any ship of an enemy which shall be sunk
or destroyed by any United States ship;" and when, by a subsequent
section (vii.), it is provided, among other apportionings, that the
chaplain shall receive "two twentieths" of this price paid for sinking
and destroying ships full of human beings? I How is it to be expected
that a clergyman, thus provided for, should prove efficacious in
enlarging upon the criminality of Judas, who, for thirty pieces of
silver, betrayed his Master?

Although, by the regulations of the Navy, each seaman's mess on board
the Neversink was furnished with a Bible, these Bibles were seldom or
never to be seen, except on Sunday mornings, when usage demands that
they shall be exhibited by the cooks of the messes, when the
master-at-arms goes his rounds on the berth-deck. At such times, they
usually surmounted a highly-polished tin-pot placed on the lid of the
chest.

Yet, for all this, the Christianity of men-of-war's men, and their
disposition to contribute to pious enterprises, are often relied upon.
Several times subscription papers were circulated among the crew of the
Neversink, while in harbour, under the direct patronage of the
Chaplain. One was for the purpose of building a seaman's chapel in
China; another to pay the salary of a tract-distributor in Greece; a
third to raise a fund for the benefit of an African Colonization
Society.

Where the Captain himself is a moral man, he makes a far better
chaplain for his crew than any clergyman can be. This is sometimes
illustrated in the case of sloops of war and armed brigs, which are not
allowed a regular chaplain. I have known one crew, who were warmly
attached to a naval commander worthy of their love, who have mustered
even with alacrity to the call to prayer; and when their Captain would
read the Church of England service to them, would present a
congregation not to be surpassed for earnestness and devotion by any
Scottish Kirk. It seemed like family devotions, where the head of the
house is foremost in confessing himself before his Maker. But our own
hearts are our best prayer-rooms, and the chaplains who can most help
us are ourselves.




