The fearless confidence of Toby was contagious, and I began to adopt the
Happar side of the question. I could not, however, overcome a certain
feeling of trepidation, as we made our way along these gloomy solitudes.
Our progress, at first comparatively easy, became more and more difficult.
The bed of the watercourse was covered with fragments of broken rocks,
which had fallen from above, offering so many obstructions to the course
of the rapid stream, which vexed and fretted about them,—forming at
intervals small waterfalls, pouring over into deep basins, or splashing
wildly upon heaps of stones.

From the narrowness of the gorge, and the steepness of its sides, there
was no mode of advancing but by wading through the water; stumbling every
moment over the impediments which lay hidden under its surface, or
tripping against the huge roots of trees. But the most annoying hindrance
we encountered was from a multitude of crooked boughs, which, shooting out
almost horizontally from the sides of the chasm, twisted themselves
together in fantastic masses almost to the surface of the stream,
affording us no passage except under the low arches which they formed.
Under these we were obliged to crawl on our hands and feet, sliding along
the oozy surface of the rocks, or slipping into the deep pools, and with
scarce light enough to guide us. Occasionally we would strike our heads
against some projecting limb of a tree; and while imprudently engaged in
rubbing the injured part, would fall sprawling amongst flinty fragments,
cutting and bruising ourselves, whilst the unpitying waters flowed over
our prostrate bodies. Belzoni, worming himself through the subterranean
passages of the Egyptian catacombs, could not have met with greater
impediments than those we here encountered. But we struggled against them
manfully, well knowing our only hope lay in advancing.

Towards sunset we halted at a spot where we made preparations for passing
the night. Here we constructed a hut, in much the same way as before, and
crawling into it, endeavoured to forget our sufferings. My companion, I
believe, slept pretty soundly; but at daybreak, when we rolled out of our
dwelling, I felt nearly disqualified for any further efforts. Toby
prescribed as a remedy for my illness the contents of one of our little
silk packages, to be taken at once in a single dose. To this species of
medical treatment, however, I would by no means accede, much as he
insisted upon it; and so we partook of our usual morsel, and silently
resumed our journey. It was the fourth day since we left Nukuheva, and the
gnawings of hunger became painfully acute. We were fain to pacify them by
chewing the tender bark of roots and twigs, which, if they did not afford
us nourishment, were at least sweet and pleasant to the taste.

Our progress along the steep watercourse was necessarily slow, and by noon
we had not advanced more than a mile. It was somewhere near this part of
the day that the noise of falling waters, which we had faintly caught in
the early morning, became more distinct; and it was not long before we
were arrested by a rocky precipice of nearly a hundred feet in depth, that
extended all across the channel, and over which the wild stream poured in
an unbroken leap. On either hand the walls of the ravine presented their
overhanging sides both above and below the fall, affording no means
whatever of avoiding the cataract by taking a circuit round it.

“What’s to be done now, Toby?” said I.

“Why,” rejoined he, “as we cannot retreat, I suppose we must keep shoving
along.”

“Very true, my dear Toby; but how do you purpose accomplishing that
desirable object?”

“By jumping from the top of the fall, if there be no other way,”
unhesitatingly replied my companion; “it will be much the quickest way of
descent; but as you are not quite as active as I am, we will try some
other way.”

And so saying, he crept cautiously along and peered over into the abyss,
while I remained wondering by what possible means we could overcome this
apparently insuperable obstruction. As soon as my companion had completed
his survey, I eagerly inquired the result.

“The result of my observations you wish to know, do you?” began Toby,
deliberately, with one of his odd looks: “well, my lad, the result of my
observation is very quickly imparted. It is at present uncertain which of
our two necks will have the honour to be broken first; but about a hundred
to one would be a fair bet in favour of the man who takes the first jump.”

“Then it is an impossible thing, is it?” inquired I, gloomily.

“No, shipmate; on the contrary, it is the easiest thing in life: the only
awkward point is the sort of usage which our unhappy limbs may receive
when we arrive at the bottom, and what sort of travelling trim we shall be
in afterwards. But follow me now, and I will show you the only chance we
have.”


