In a short time the last straggler was seen hurrying on his way, and the
faint shouts of those in advance died insensibly upon the ear. Our part of
the valley now appeared nearly deserted by its inhabitants, Kory-Kory, his
aged father, and a few decrepid old people being all that were left.

Towards sunset, the islanders in small parties began to return from the
beach, and among them, as they drew near to the house, I sought to descry
the form of my companion. But one after another they passed the dwelling,
and I caught no glimpse of him. Supposing, however, that he would soon
appear with some of the members of the household, I quieted my
apprehensions, and waited patiently to see him advancing, in company with
the beautiful Fayaway. At last I perceived Tinor coming forward, followed
by the girls and young men who usually resided in the house of Marheyo;
but with them came not my comrade, and, filled with a thousand alarms, I
eagerly sought to discover the cause of his delay.

My earnest questions appeared to embarrass the natives greatly. All their
accounts were contradictory: one giving me to understand that Toby would
be with me in a very short time; another, that he did not know where he
was; while a third, violently inveighing against him, assured me that he
had stolen away, and would never come back. It appeared to me, at the
time, that in making these various statements they endeavoured to conceal
from me some terrible disaster, lest the knowledge of it should overpower
me.

Fearful lest some fatal calamity had overtaken him, I sought out young
Fayaway, and endeavoured to learn from her, if possible, the truth.

This gentle being had early attracted my regard, not only from her
extraordinary beauty, but from the attractive cast of her countenance,
singularly expressive of intelligence and humanity. Of all the natives,
she alone seemed to appreciate the effect which the peculiarity of the
circumstances in which we were placed had produced upon the minds of my
companion and myself. In addressing me—especially when I lay reclining
upon the mats suffering from pain—there was a tenderness in her manner
which it was impossible to misunderstand or resist. Whenever she entered
the house, the expression of her face indicated the liveliest sympathy for
me; and moving towards the place where I lay, with one arm slightly
elevated in a gesture of pity, and her large glistening eyes gazing
intently into mine, she would murmur plaintively, “Awha! awha! Tommo,” and
seat herself mournfully beside me.

Her manner convinced me that she deeply compassionated my situation, as
being removed from my country and friends, and placed beyond the reach of
all relief. Indeed, at times I was almost led to believe that her mind was
swayed by gentle impulses hardly to be anticipated from one in her
condition; that she appeared to be conscious there were ties rudely
severed, which had once bound us to our homes; that there were sisters and
brothers anxiously looking forward to our return, who were perhaps never
more to behold us.

In this amiable light did Fayaway appear in my eyes; and, reposing full
confidence in her candour and intelligence, I now had recourse to her, in
the midst of my alarm with regard to my companion.

My questions evidently distressed her. She looked round from one to
another of the bystanders, as if hardly knowing what answer to give me. At
last, yielding to my importunities, she overcame her scruples, and gave me
to understand that Toby had gone away with the boats which had visited the
bay, but had promised to return at the expiration of three days. At first
I accused him of perfidiously deserting me; but as I grew more composed, I
upbraided myself for imputing so cowardly an action to him, and
tranquillized myself with the belief that he had availed himself of the
opportunity to go round to Nukuheva, in order to make some arrangement by
which I could be removed from the valley. At any rate, thought I, he will
return with the medicines I require, and then, as soon as I recover, there
will be no difficulty in the way of our departure.

Consoling myself with these reflections, I lay down that night in a
happier frame of mind than I had done for some time. The next day passed
without any allusion to Toby on the part of the natives, who seemed
desirous of avoiding all reference to the subject. This raised some
apprehensions in my breast; but, when night came, I congratulated myself
that the second day had now gone by, and that on the morrow Toby would
again be with me. But the morrow came and went, and my companion did not
appear. Ah! thought I, he reckons three days from the morning of his
departure—to-morrow he will arrive. But that weary day also closed upon me
without his return. Even yet I would not despair. I thought that something
detained him—that he was waiting for the sailing of a boat at Nukuheva,
and that in a day or two, at farthest, I should see him again. But day
after day of renewed disappointment passed by; at last hope deserted me,
and I fell a victim to despair.

Yes, thought I, gloomily, he has secured his own escape, and cares not
what calamity may befall his unfortunate comrade. Fool that I was, to
suppose that any one would willingly encounter the perils of this valley,
after having once got beyond its limits! He has gone, and has left me to
combat alone all the dangers by which I am surrounded. Thus would I
sometimes seek to derive a desperate consolation from dwelling upon the
perfidy of Toby; whilst, at other times, I sunk under the bitter remorse
which I felt at having, by my own imprudence, brought upon myself the fate
which I was sure awaited me.

At other times I thought that perhaps, after all, these treacherous
savages had made away with him, and thence the confusion into which they
were thrown by my questions, and their contradictory answers; or he might
be a captive in some other part of the valley; or, more dreadful still,
might have met with that fate at which my very soul shuddered. But all
these speculations were vain; no tidings of Toby ever reached me—he had
gone never to return.

The conduct of the islanders appeared inexplicable. All reference to my
lost comrade was carefully evaded, and if at any time they were forced to
make some reply to my frequent inquiries on the subject, they would
uniformly denounce him as an ungrateful runaway, who had deserted his
friend, and taken himself off to that vile and detestable place Nukuheva.

But whatever might have been his fate, now that he was gone the natives
multiplied their acts of kindness and attention towards myself, treating
me with a degree of deference which could hardly have been surpassed had I
been some celestial visitant. Kory-Kory never for one moment left my side,
unless it were to execute my wishes. The faithful fellow, twice every day,
in the cool of the morning and in the evening, insisted upon carrying me
to the stream, and bathing me in its refreshing water.

Frequently, in the afternoon, he would carry me to a particular part of
the stream, where the beauty of the scene produced a soothing influence
upon my mind. At this place the waters flowed between grassy banks,
planted with enormous bread-fruit trees, whose vast branches, interlacing
overhead, formed a leafy canopy; near the stream were several smooth black
rocks. One of these, projecting several feet above the surface of the
water, had upon its summit a shallow cavity, which, filled with
freshly-gathered leaves, formed a delightful couch.

Here I often laid for hours, covered with a gauze-like veil of tappa,
while Fayaway, seated beside me, and holding in her hand a fan woven from
the leaflets of a young cocoa-nut bough, brushed aside the insects that
occasionally lighted on my face, and Kory-Kory, with a view of chasing
away my melancholy, performed a thousand antics in the water before us.

As my eye wandered along this romantic stream, it would fall upon the
half-immersed figure of a beautiful girl, standing in the transparent
water, and catching in a little net a species of diminutive shell-fish, of
which these people are extravagantly fond. Sometimes a chattering group
would be seated upon the edge of a low rock in the midst of the brook,
busily engaged in thinning and polishing the shells of cocoa-nuts, by
rubbing them briskly with a small stone in the water, an operation which
soon converts them into a light and elegant drinking-vessel, somewhat
resembling goblets made of tortoise-shell.

But the tranquillizing influences of beautiful scenery, and the exhibition
of human life under so novel and charming an aspect, were not my only
sources of consolation.

