Regarded in this indicatory light, the battle between the Bon Homme Richard and the Serapis—­in itself so curious—­may well enlist our interest.
Never was there a fight so snarled.  The intricacy of those incidents which defy the narrator’s extrication, is not illy figured in that bewildering intertanglement of all the yards and anchors of the two ships, which confounded them for the time in one chaos of devastation.
Elsewhere than here the reader must go who seeks an elaborate version of the fight, or, indeed, much of any regular account of it whatever.  The writer is but brought to mention the battle because he must needs follow, in all events, the fortunes of the humble adventurer whose life lie records.  Yet this necessarily involves some general view of each conspicuous incident in which he shares.
Several circumstances of the place and time served to invest the fight with a certain scenic atmosphere casting a light almost poetic over the wild gloom of its tragic results.  The battle was fought between the hours of seven and ten at night; the height of it was under a full harvest moon, in view of thousands of distant spectators crowning the high cliffs of Yorkshire.
From the Tees to the Humber, the eastern coast of Britain, for the most part, wears a savage, melancholy, and Calabrian aspect.  It is in course of incessant decay.  Every year the isle which repulses nearly all other foes, succumbs to the Attila assaults of the deep.  Here and there the base of the cliffs is strewn with masses of rock, undermined by the waves, and tumbled headlong below, where, sometimes, the water completely surrounds them, showing in shattered confusion detached rocks, pyramids, and obelisks, rising half-revealed from the surf—­the Tadmores of the wasteful desert of the sea.  Nowhere is this desolation more marked than for those fifty miles of coast between Flamborough Head and the Spurm.
Weathering out the gale which had driven them from Leith, Paul’s ships for a few days were employed in giving chase to various merchantmen and colliers; capturing some, sinking others, and putting the rest to flight.  Off the mouth of the Humber they ineffectually manoeuvred with a view of drawing out a king’s frigate, reported to be lying at anchor within.  At another time a large fleet was encountered, under convoy of some ships of force.  But their panic caused the fleet to hug the edge of perilous shoals very nigh the land, where, by reason of his having no competent pilot, Paul durst not approach to molest them.  The same night he saw two strangers further out at sea, and chased them until three in the morning, when, getting pretty nigh, ho surmised that they must needs be vessels of his own squadron, which, previous to his entering the Firth of Forth, had separated from his command.  Daylight proved this supposition correct.  Five vessels of the original squadron were now once more in company.  About noon a fleet of forty merchantmen appeared coming round Flamborough Head, protected by two English man-of-war, the Serapis and Countess of Scarborough.  Descrying the five cruisers sailing down, the forty sail, like forty chickens, fluttered in a panic under the wing of the shore.  Their armed protectors bravely steered from the land, making the disposition for battle.  Promptly accepting the challenge, Paul, giving the signal to his consorts, earnestly pressed forward.  But, earnest as he was, it was seven in the evening ere the encounter began.  Meantime his comrades, heedless of his signals, sailed independently along.  Dismissing them from present consideration, we confine ourselves, for a while, to the Richard and the Serapis, the grand duellists of the fight.
The Richard carried a motley, crew, to keep whom in order one hundred and thirty-five soldiers—­themselves a hybrid band—­had been put on board, commanded by French officers of inferior rank.  Her armament was similarly heterogeneous; guns of all sorts and calibres; but about equal on the whole to those of a thirty-two-gun frigate.  The spirit of baneful intermixture pervaded this craft throughout.
The Serapis was a frigate of fifty guns, more than half of which individually exceeded in calibre any one gun of the Richard.  She had a crew of some three hundred and twenty trained man-of-war’s men.
There is something in a naval engagement which radically distinguishes it from one on the land.  The ocean, at times, has what is called its sea and its trough of the sea; but it has neither rivers, woods, banks, towns, nor mountains.  In mild weather it is one hammered plain.  Stratagems, like those of disciplined armies—­ambuscades, like those of Indians, are impossible.  All is clear, open, fluent.  The very element which sustains the combatants, yields at the stroke of a feather.  One wind and one tide at one time operate upon all who here engage.  This simplicity renders a battle between two men-of-war, with their huge white wings, more akin to the Miltonic contests of archangels than to the comparatively squalid tussles of earth.
As the ships neared, a hazy darkness overspread the water.  The moon was not yet risen.  Objects were perceived with difficulty.  Borne by a soft moist breeze over gentle waves, they came within pistol-shot.  Owing to the obscurity, and the known neighborhood of other vessels, the Serapis was uncertain who the Richard was.  Through the dim mist each ship loomed forth to the other vast, but indistinct, as the ghost of Morven.  Sounds of the trampling of resolute men echoed from either hull, whose tight decks dully resounded like drum-heads in a funeral march.
The Serapis hailed.  She was answered by a broadside.  For half an hour the combatants deliberately manoeuvred, continually changing their position, but always within shot fire.  The.  Serapis—­the better sailer of the two—­kept critically circling the Richard, making lounging advances now and then, and as suddenly steering off; hate causing her to act not unlike a wheeling cock about a hen, when stirred by the contrary passion.  Meantime, though within easy speaking distance, no further syllable was exchanged; but an incessant cannonade was kept up.
At this point, a third party, the Scarborough, drew near, seemingly desirous of giving assistance to her consort.  But thick smoke was now added to the night’s natural obscurity.  The Scarborough imperfectly discerned two ships, and plainly saw the common fire they made; but which was which, she could not tell.  Eager to befriend the Serapis, she durst not fire a gun, lest she might unwittingly act the part of a foe.  As when a hawk and a crow are clawing and beaking high in the air, a second crow flying near, will seek to join the battle, but finding no fair chance to engage, at last flies away to the woods; just so did the Scarborough now.  Prudence dictated the step; because several chance shot—­from which of the combatants could not be known—­had already struck the Scarborough.  So, unwilling uselessly to expose herself, off went for the present this baffled and ineffectual friend.
Not long after, an invisible hand came and set down a great yellow lamp in the east.  The hand reached up unseen from below the horizon, and set the lamp down right on the rim of the horizon, as on a threshold; as much as to say, Gentlemen warriors, permit me a little to light up this rather gloomy looking subject.  The lamp was the round harvest moon; the one solitary foot-light of the scene.  But scarcely did the rays from the lamp pierce that languid haze.  Objects before perceived with difficulty, now glimmered ambiguously.  Bedded in strange vapors, the great foot-light cast a dubious, half demoniac glare across the waters, like the phantasmagoric stream sent athwart a London flagging in a night-rain from an apothecary’s blue and green window.  Through this sardonical mist, the face of the Man-in-the-Moon—­looking right towards the combatants, as if he were standing in a trap-door of the sea, leaning forward leisurely with his arms complacently folded over upon the edge of the horizon—­this queer face wore a serious, apishly self-satisfied leer, as if the Man-in-the-Moon had somehow secretly put up the ships to their contest, and in the depths of his malignant old soul was not unpleased to see how well his charms worked.  There stood the grinning Man-in-the-Moon, his head just dodging into view over the rim of the sea:—­Mephistopheles prompter of the stage.
Aided now a little by the planet, one of the consorts of the Richard, the Pallas, hovering far outside the fight, dimly discerned the suspicious form of a lonely vessel unknown to her.  She resolved to engage it, if it proved a foe.  But ere they joined, the unknown ship—­which proved to be the Scarborough—­received a broadside at long gun’s distance from another consort of the Richard the Alliance.  The shot whizzed across the broad interval like shuttlecocks across a great hall.  Presently the battledores of both batteries were at work, and rapid compliments of shuttlecocks were very promptly exchanged.  The adverse consorts of the two main belligerents fought with all the rage of those fiery seconds who in some desperate duels make their principal’s quarrel their own.  Diverted from the Richard and the Serapis by this little by-play, the Man-in-the-Moon, all eager to see what it was, somewhat raised himself from his trap-door with an added grin on his face.  By this time, off sneaked the Alliance, and down swept the Pallas, at close quarters engaging the Scarborough; an encounter destined in less than an hour to end in the latter ship’s striking her flag.

