Typee or Happar? A frightful death at the hands of the fiercest of
cannibals, or a kindly reception from a gentler race of savages? Which?
But it was too late now to discuss a question which would so soon be
answered.

The part of the valley in which we found ourselves appeared to be
altogether uninhabited. An almost impenetrable thicket extended from side
to side, without presenting a single plant affording the nourishment we
had confidently calculated upon; and with this object, we followed the
course of the stream, casting quick glances as we proceeded into the thick
jungles on either hand.

My companion—to whose solicitations I had yielded in descending into the
valley—now that the step was taken, began to manifest a degree of caution
I had little expected from him. He proposed that in the event of our
finding an adequate supply of fruit, we should remain in this unfrequented
portion of the valley—where we should run little chance of being surprised
by its occupants, whoever they might be—until sufficiently recruited to
resume our journey; when laying in a store of food equal to our wants, we
might easily regain the bay of Nukuheva, after the lapse of a sufficient
interval to ensure the departure of our vessel.

I objected strongly to this proposition, plausible as it was, as the
difficulties of the route would almost be insurmountable, unacquainted as
we were with the general bearings of the country, and I reminded my
companion of the hardships which we had already encountered in our
uncertain wanderings; in a word, I said that since we had deemed it
advisable to enter the valley, we ought manfully to face the consequences,
whatever they might be; the more especially as I was convinced there was
no alternative left us but to fall in with the natives at once, and boldly
risk the reception they might give us: and that as to myself, I felt the
necessity of rest and shelter, and that until I had obtained them, I
should be wholly unable to encounter such sufferings as we had lately
passed through. To the justice of these observations Toby somewhat
reluctantly assented.

We were surprised that, after moving as far as we had along the valley, we
would still meet with the same impervious thickets; and thinking that
although the borders of the stream might be lined for some distance with
them, yet beyond there might be more open ground, I requested Toby to keep
a bright look-out upon one side, while I did the same on the other, in
order to discover some opening in the bushes, and especially to watch for
the slightest appearance of a path or anything else that might indicate
the vicinity of the islanders.

What furtive and anxious glances we cast into those dim-looking shades!
With what apprehensions we proceeded, ignorant at what moment we might be
greeted by the javelin of some ambushed savage! At last my companion
paused, and directed my attention to a narrow opening in the foliage. We
struck into it, and it soon brought us by an indistinctly traced path to a
comparatively clear space, at the farther end of which we descried a
number of the trees, the native name of which is “annuee,” and which bear
a most delicious fruit.

What a race! I hobbling over the ground like some decrepid wretch, and
Toby leaping forward like a greyhound. He quickly cleared one of the trees
on which there were two or three of the fruit, but to our chagrin they
proved to be much decayed; the rinds partly opened by the birds, and their
hearts half devoured. However, we quickly despatched them, and no ambrosia
could have been more delicious.

We looked about us uncertain whither to direct our steps, since the path
we had so far followed appeared to be lost in the open space around us. At
last we resolved to enter a grove near at hand, and had advanced a few
rods, when, just upon its skirts, I picked up a slender bread-fruit shoot
perfectly green, and with the tender bark freshly stript from it. It was
slippery with moisture, and appeared as if it had been but that moment
thrown aside. I said nothing, but merely held it up to Toby, who started
at this undeniable evidence of the vicinity of the savages.

The plot was now thickening.—A short distance farther lay a little faggot
of the same shoots bound together with a strip of bark. Could it have been
thrown down by some solitary native, who, alarmed at seeing us, had
hurried forward to carry the tidings of our approach to his
countrymen?—Typee or Happar?—But it was too late to recede, so we moved on
slowly, my companion in advance casting eager glances under the trees on
either side, until all at once I saw him recoil as if stung by an adder.
Sinking on his knee, he waved me off with one hand, while with the other
he held aside some intervening leaves, and gazed intently at some object.

Disregarding his injunction, I quickly approached him and caught a glimpse
of two figures partly hidden by the dense foliage; they were standing
close together, and were perfectly motionless. They must have previously
perceived us, and withdrawn into the depths of the wood to elude our
observation.

My mind was at once made up. Dropping my staff, and tearing open the
package of things we had brought from the ship, I unrolled the cotton
cloth, and holding it in one hand, plucked with the other a twig from the
bushes beside me, and telling Toby to follow my example, I broke through
the covert and advanced, waving the branch in token of peace towards the
shrinking forms before me.

They were a boy and a girl, slender and graceful, and completely naked,
with the exception of a slight girdle of bark, from which depended at
opposite points two of the russet leaves of the bread-fruit tree. An arm
of the boy, half screened from sight by her wild tresses, was thrown about
the neck of the girl, while with the other he held one of her hands in
his; and thus they stood together, their heads inclined forward, catching
the faint noise we made in our progress, and with one foot in advance, as
if half inclined to fly from our presence.


