I knew that our worthy captain, who felt such a paternal solicitude for
the welfare of his crew, would not willingly consent that one of his best
hands should encounter the perils of a sojourn among the natives of a
barbarous island; and I was certain that in the event of my disappearance
his fatherly anxiety would prompt him to offer, by way of a reward, yard
upon yard of gaily printed calico for my apprehension. He might even have
appreciated my services at the value of a musket, in which case I felt
perfectly certain that the whole population of the bay would be
immediately upon my track, incited by the prospect of so magnificent a
bounty.

Having ascertained the fact before alluded to, that the islanders, from
motives of precaution, dwelt together in the depths of the valleys, and
avoided wandering about the more elevated portions of the shore, unless
bound on some expedition of war or plunder, I concluded that if I could
effect unperceived a passage to the mountains, I might easily remain among
them, supporting myself by such fruits as came in my way until the sailing
of the ship, an event of which I could not fail to be immediately
apprized, as from my lofty position I should command a view of the entire
harbour.

The idea pleased me greatly. It seemed to combine a great deal of
practicability with no inconsiderable enjoyment in a quiet way; for how
delightful it would be to look down upon the detested old vessel from the
height of some thousand feet, and contrast the verdant scenery about me
with the recollection of her narrow decks and gloomy forecastle! Why, it
was really refreshing even to think of it; and so I straightway fell to
picturing myself seated beneath a cocoa-nut tree on the brow of the
mountain, with a cluster of plantains within easy reach, criticizing her
nautical evolutions as she was working her way out of the harbour.

To be sure there was one rather unpleasant drawback to these agreeable
anticipations—the possibility of falling in with a foraging party of these
same bloody-minded Typees, whose appetites, edged perhaps by the air of so
elevated a region, might prompt them to devour one. This, I must confess,
was the most disagreeable view of the matter.

Just to think of a party of these unnatural gourmands taking it into their
heads to make a convivial meal of a poor devil, who would have no means of
escape or defence: however, there was no help for it. I was willing to
encounter some risks in order to accomplish my object, and counted much
upon my ability to elude these prowling cannibals amongst the many coverts
which the mountains afforded. Besides, the chances were ten to one in my
favour that they would none of them quit their own fastnesses.

I had determined not to communicate my design of withdrawing from the
vessel to any of my shipmates, and least of all to solicit any one to
accompany me in my flight. But it so happened one night, that being upon
deck, revolving over in my mind various plans of escape, I perceived one
of the ship’s company leaning over the bulwarks, apparently plunged in a
profound reverie. He was a young fellow about my own age, for whom I had
all along entertained a great regard; and Toby, such was the name by which
he went among us, for his real name he would never tell us, was every way
worthy of it. He was active, ready, and obliging, of dauntless courage,
and singularly open and fearless in the expression of his feelings. I had
on more than one occasion got him out of scrapes into which this had led
him; and I know not whether it was from this cause, or a certain
congeniality of sentiment between us, that he had always shown a
partiality for my society. We had battled out many a long watch together,
beguiling the weary hours with chat, song, and story, mingled with a good
many imprecations upon the hard destiny it seemed our common fortune to
encounter.

  [Illustration: I FOUND HIM RIPE FOR THE ENTERPRISE, AND A VERY FEW
  WORDS SUFFICED FOR A MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN US]

Toby, like myself, had evidently moved in a different sphere of life, and
his conversation at times betrayed this, although he was anxious to
conceal it. He was one of that class of rovers you sometimes meet at sea,
who never reveal their origin, never allude to home, and go rambling over
the world as if pursued by some mysterious fate they cannot possibly
elude.

There was much even in the appearance of Toby calculated to draw me
towards him, for while the greater part of the crew were as coarse in
person as in mind, Toby was endowed with a remarkably prepossessing
exterior. Arrayed in his blue frock and duck trousers, he was as smart a
looking sailor as ever stepped upon a deck; he was singularly small and
slightly made, with great flexibility of limb. His naturally dark
complexion had been deepened by exposure to the tropical sun, and a mass
of jetty locks clustered about his temples, and threw a darker shade into
his large black eyes. He was a strange wayward being, moody, fitful, and
melancholy—at times almost morose. He had a quick and fiery temper too,
which, when thoroughly roused, transported him into a state bordering on
delirium.


