"No--I say not guilty to that--lever bluidy unless there's resistance,
and that sets a man's bristles up, ye ken. And this is nae great matter,
after a'; just to cut the comb of a young cock that has been crawing a
little ower crousely."

"Not young Earnscliff?" said the Solitary, with some emotion.

"No; not young Earnscliff--not young Earnscliff YET; but his time may
come, if he will not take warning, and get him back to the burrow-town
that he's fit for, and no keep skelping about here, destroying the
few deer that are left in the country, and pretending to act as a
magistrate, and writing letters to the great folk at Auld Reekie, about
the disturbed state of the land. Let him take care o' himsell."

"Then it must be Hobbie of the Heugh-foot," said Elshie. "What harm has
the lad done you?"

"Harm! nae great harm; but I hear he says I staid away from the Ba'spiel
on Fastern's E'en, for fear of him; and it was only for fear of the
Country Keeper, for there was a warrant against me. I'll stand Hobbie's
feud, and a' his clan's. But it's not so much for that, as to gie him
a lesson not to let his tongue gallop ower freely about his betters. I
trow he will hae lost the best pen-feather o' his wing before to-morrow
morning.--Farewell, Elshie; there's some canny boys waiting for me down
amang the shaws, owerby; I will see you as I come back, and bring ye a
blithe tale in return for your leech-craft."

Ere the Dwarf could collect himself to reply, the Reiver of Westburnflat
set spurs to his horse. The animal, starting at one of the stones which
lay scattered about, flew from the path. The rider exercised his spurs
without moderation or mercy. The horse became furious, reared, kicked,
plunged, and bolted like a deer, with all his four feet off the ground
at once. It was in vain; the unrelenting rider sate as if he had been
a part of the horse which he bestrode; and, after a short but furious
contest, compelled the subdued animal to proceed upon the path at a rate
which soon carried him out of sight of the Solitary.

"That villain," exclaimed the Dwarf,--"that cool-blooded, hardened,
unrelenting ruffian,--that wretch, whose every thought is infected with
crimes,--has thewes and sinews, limbs, strength, and activity enough, to
compel a nobler animal than himself to carry him to the place where he
is to perpetrate his wickedness; while I, had I the weakness to wish to
put his wretched victim on his guard, and to save the helpless family,
would see my good intentions frustrated by the decrepitude which chains
me to the spot.--Why should I wish it were otherwise? What have my
screech-owl voice, my hideous form, and my mis-shapen features, to
do with the fairer workmanship of nature? Do not men receive even my
benefits with shrinking horror and ill-suppressed disgust? And why
should I interest myself in a race which accounts me a prodigy and an
outcast, and which has treated me as such? No; by all the ingratitude
which I have reaped--by all the wrongs which I have sustained--by my
imprisonment, my stripes, my chains, I will wrestle down my feelings of
rebellious humanity! I will not be the fool I have been, to swerve from
my principles whenever there was an appeal, forsooth, to my feelings; as
if I, towards whom none show sympathy, ought to have sympathy with any
one. Let Destiny drive forth her scythed car through the overwhelmed and
trembling mass of humanity! Shall I be the idiot to throw this decrepit
form, this mis-shapen lump of mortality, under her wheels, that the
Dwarf, the Wizard, the Hunchback, may save from destruction some fair
form or some active frame, and all the world clap their hands at the
exchange? No, never!--And yet this Elliot--this Hobbie, so young and
gallant, so frank, so--I will think of it no longer. I cannot aid him if
I would, and I am resolved--firmly resolved, that I would not aid him,
if a wish were the pledge of his safety!"

Having thus ended his soliloquy, he retreated into his hut for shelter
from the storm which was fast approaching, and now began to burst in
large and heavy drops of rain. The last rays of the sun now disappeared
entirely, and two or three claps of distant thunder followed each other
at brief intervals, echoing and re-echoing among the range of heathy
fells like the sound of a distant engagement.



