"The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the old Quatre
Face, as the house is four sided, agreeing with the cardinal points of
the compass.  It contains in all some twenty acres, quite surrounded
by the solid stone wall above mentioned.  There are many trees on it,
which make it in places gloomy, and there is a deep, dark-looking pond
or small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water is clear
and flows away in a fair-sized stream.  The house is very large and of
all periods back, I should say, to mediaeval times, for one part is of
stone immensely thick, with only a few windows high up and heavily
barred with iron.  It looks like part of a keep, and is close to an
old chapel or church.  I could not enter it, as I had not the key of
the door leading to it from the house, but I have taken with my Kodak
views of it from various points.  The house had been added to, but in
a very straggling way, and I can only guess at the amount of ground it
covers, which must be very great.  There are but few houses close at
hand, one being a very large house only recently added to and formed
into a private lunatic asylum.  It is not, however, visible from the
grounds."

When I had finished, he said, "I am glad that it is old and big.  I
myself am of an old family, and to live in a new house would kill me.
A house cannot be made habitable in a day, and after all, how few days
go to make up a century.  I rejoice also that there is a chapel of old
times.  We Transylvanian nobles love not to think that our bones may
lie amongst the common dead.  I seek not gaiety nor mirth, not the
bright voluptuousness of much sunshine and sparkling waters which
please the young and gay.  I am no longer young, and my heart, through
weary years of mourning over the dead, is not attuned to mirth.  Moreover,
the walls of my castle are broken.  The shadows are many, and the wind
breathes cold through the broken battlements and casements.  I love
the shade and the shadow, and would be alone with my thoughts when I
may."  Somehow his words and his look did not seem to accord, or else
it was that his cast of face made his smile look malignant and
saturnine.

Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to pull my papers
together.  He was some little time away, and I began to look at some
of the books around me.  One was an atlas, which I found opened
naturally to England, as if that map had been much used.  On looking
at it I found in certain places little rings marked, and on examining
these I noticed that one was near London on the east side, manifestly
where his new estate was situated.  The other two were Exeter, and
Whitby on the Yorkshire coast.

It was the better part of an hour when the Count returned.  "Aha!" he
said.  "Still at your books?  Good!  But you must not work always.
Come!  I am informed that your supper is ready."  He took my arm, and
we went into the next room, where I found an excellent supper ready on
the table.  The Count again excused himself, as he had dined out on
his being away from home.  But he sat as on the previous night, and
chatted whilst I ate.  After supper I smoked, as on the last evening,
and the Count stayed with me, chatting and asking questions on every
conceivable subject, hour after hour.  I felt that it was getting very
late indeed, but I did not say anything, for I felt under obligation
to meet my host's wishes in every way.  I was not sleepy, as the long
sleep yesterday had fortified me, but I could not help experiencing
that chill which comes over one at the coming of the dawn, which is
like, in its way, the turn of the tide.  They say that people who are
near death die generally at the change to dawn or at the turn of the
tide.  Anyone who has when tired, and tied as it were to his post,
experienced this change in the atmosphere can well believe it.  All at
once we heard the crow of the cock coming up with preternatural
shrillness through the clear morning air.

Count Dracula, jumping to his feet, said, "Why there is the morning
again!  How remiss I am to let you stay up so long.  You must make
your conversation regarding my dear new country of England less
interesting, so that I may not forget how time flies by us," and with
a courtly bow, he quickly left me.

I went into my room and drew the curtains, but there was little to
notice.  My window opened into the courtyard, all I could see was the
warm grey of quickening sky.  So I pulled the curtains again, and have
written of this day.


8 May.--I began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was getting too
diffuse.  But now I am glad that I went into detail from the first,
for there is something so strange about this place and all in it that
I cannot but feel uneasy.  I wish I were safe out of it, or that I had
never come.  It may be that this strange night existence is telling on
me, but would that that were all!  If there were any one to talk to I
could bear it, but there is no one.  I have only the Count to speak
with, and he--I fear I am myself the only living soul within the
place.  Let me be prosaic so far as facts can be.  It will help me to
bear up, and imagination must not run riot with me.  If it does I am
lost.  Let me say at once how I stand, or seem to.

I only slept a few hours when I went to bed, and feeling that I could
not sleep any more, got up.  I had hung my shaving glass by the
window, and was just beginning to shave.  Suddenly I felt a hand on my
shoulder, and heard the Count's voice saying to me, "Good morning."  I
started, for it amazed me that I had not seen him, since the
reflection of the glass covered the whole room behind me.  In starting
I had cut myself slightly, but did not notice it at the moment.  Having
answered the Count's salutation, I turned to the glass again to see
how I had been mistaken.  This time there could be no error, for the
man was close to me, and I could see him over my shoulder.  But there
was no reflection of him in the mirror!  The whole room behind me was
displayed, but there was no sign of a man in it, except myself.

This was startling, and coming on the top of so many strange things,
was beginning to increase that vague feeling of uneasiness which I
always have when the Count is near.  But at the instant I saw that the
cut had bled a little, and the blood was trickling over my chin.  I
laid down the razor, turning as I did so half round to look for some
sticking plaster.  When the Count saw my face, his eyes blazed with a
sort of demoniac fury, and he suddenly made a grab at my throat.  I
drew away and his hand touched the string of beads which held the
crucifix.  It made an instant change in him, for the fury passed so
quickly that I could hardly believe that it was ever there.

"Take care," he said, "take care how you cut yourself.  It is more
dangerous that you think in this country."  Then seizing the shaving
glass, he went on, "And this is the wretched thing that has done the
mischief.  It is a foul bauble of man's vanity.  Away with it!"  And
opening the window with one wrench of his terrible hand, he flung out
the glass, which was shattered into a thousand pieces on the stones of
the courtyard far below.  Then he withdrew without a word.  It is very
annoying, for I do not see how I am to shave, unless in my watch-case
or the bottom of the shaving pot, which is fortunately of metal.


