Whilst she was hesitating, Mrs. Grant appeared, saying as she entered
the room: "Doctor Winchester is come, miss, and is asking for you."

I obeyed Miss Trelawny's look; together we left the room.

When the Doctor had made his examination, he told us that there was
seemingly no change.  He added that nevertheless he would like to stay
in the house that night is he might.  Miss Trelawny looked glad, and
sent word to Mrs. Grant to get a room ready for him.  Later in the day,
when he and I happened to be alone together, he said suddenly:

"I have arranged to stay here tonight because I want to have a talk
with you.  And as I wish it to be quite private, I thought the least
suspicious way would be to have a cigar together late in the evening
when Miss Trelawny is watching her father."  We still kept to our
arrangement that either the sick man's daughter or I should be on watch
all night.  We were to share the duty at the early hours of the
morning. I was anxious about this, for I knew from our conversation
that the Detective would watch in secret himself, and would be
particularly alert about that time.

The day passed uneventfully.  Miss Trelawny slept in the afternoon; and
after dinner went to relieve the Nurse.  Mrs. Grant remained with her,
Sergeant Daw being on duty in the corridor.  Doctor Winchester and I
took our coffee in the library.  When we had lit our cigars he said
quietly:

"Now that we are alone I want to have a confidential talk.  We are
'tiled,' of course; for the present at all events?"

"Quite so!" I said, my heart sinking as I thought of my conversation
with Sergeant Daw in the morning, and of the disturbing and harrowing
fears which it had left in my mind.  He went on:

"This case is enough to try the sanity of all of us concerned in it.
The more I think of it, the madder I seem to get; and the two lines,
each continually strengthened, seem to pull harder in opposite
directions."

"What two lines?"  He looked at me keenly for a moment before replying.
Doctor Winchester's look at such moments was apt to be disconcerting.
It would have been so to me had I had a personal part, other than my
interest in Miss Trelawny, in the matter.  As it was, however, I stood
it unruffled.  I was now an attorney in the case; an amicus curiae in
one sense, in another retained for the defence.  The mere thought that
in this clever man's mind were two lines, equally strong and opposite,
was in itself so consoling as to neutralise my anxiety as to a new
attack.  As he began to speak, the Doctor's face wore an inscrutable
smile; this, however, gave place to a stern gravity as he proceeded:

"Two lines:  Fact and--Fancy!  In the first there is this whole thing;
attacks, attempts at robbery and murder; stupefyings; organised
catalepsy which points to either criminal hypnotism and thought
suggestion, or some simple form of poisoning unclassified yet in our
toxicology.  In the other there is some influence at work which is not
classified in any book that I know--outside the pages of romance.  I
never felt in my life so strongly the truth of Hamlet's words:

     'There are more things in Heaven and earth...
     Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.'

"Let us take the 'Fact' side first.  Here we have a man in his home;
amidst his own household; plenty of servants of different classes in
the house, which forbids the possibility of an organised attempt made
from the servants" hall.  He is wealthy, learned, clever.  From his
physiognomy there is no doubting that he is a man of iron will and
determined purpose.  His daughter--his only child, I take it, a young
girl bright and clever--is sleeping in the very next room to his.
There is seemingly no possible reason for expecting any attack or
disturbance of any kind; and no reasonable opportunity for any outsider
to effect it.  And yet we have an attack made; a brutal and remorseless
attack, made in the middle of the night.  Discovery is made quickly;
made with that rapidity which in criminal cases generally is found to
be not accidental, but of premeditated intent.  The attacker, or
attackers, are manifestly disturbed before the completion of their
work, whatever their ultimate intent may have been.  And yet there is
no possible sign of their escape; no clue, no disturbance of anything;
no open door or window; no sound.  Nothing whatever to show who had
done the deed, or even that a deed has been done; except the victim,
and his surroundings incidental to the deed!

"The next night a similar attempt is made, though the house is full of
wakeful people; and though there are on watch in the room and around it
a detective officer, a trained nurse, an earnest friend, and the man's
own daughter.  The nurse is thrown into a catalepsy, and the watching
friend--though protected by a respirator--into a deep sleep.  Even the
detective is so far overcome with some phase of stupor that he fires
off his pistol in the sick-room, and can't even tell what he thought he
was firing at.  That respirator of yours is the only thing that seems
to have a bearing on the 'fact' side of the affair.  That you did not
lose your head as the others did--the effect in such case being in
proportion to the amount of time each remained in the room--points to
the probability that the stupefying medium was not hypnotic, whatever
else it may have been.  But again, there is a fact which is
contradictory. Miss Trelawny, who was in the room more than any of
you--for she was in and out all the time and did her share of permanent
watching also--did not seem to be affected at all.  This would show
that the influence, whatever it is, does not affect generally--unless,
of course, it was that she was in some way inured to it.  If it should
turn out that it be some strange exhalation from some of those Egyptian
curios, that might account for it; only, we are then face to face with
the fact that Mr. Trelawny, who was most of all in the room--who, in
fact, lived more than half his life in it--was affected worst of all.
What kind of influence could it be which would account for all these
different and contradictory effects?  No! the more I think of this form
of the dilemma, the more I am bewildered!  Why, even if it were that
the attack, the physical attack, on Mr. Trelawny had been made by some
one residing in the house and not within the sphere of suspicion, the
oddness of the stupefyings would still remain a mystery.  It is not
easy to put anyone into a catalepsy.  Indeed, so far as is known yet in
science, there is no way to achieve such an object at will.  The crux
of the whole matter is Miss Trelawny, who seems to be subject to none
of the influences, or possibly of the variants of the same influence at
work.  Through all she goes unscathed, except for that one slight
semi-faint.  It is most strange!"

I listened with a sinking heart; for, though his manner was not
illuminative of distrust, his argument was disturbing.  Although it was
not so direct as the suspicion of the Detective, it seemed to single
out Miss Trelawny as different from all others concerned; and in a
mystery to be alone is to be suspected, ultimately if not immediately.
I thought it better not to say anything.  In such a case silence is
indeed golden; and if I said nothing now I might have less to defend,
or explain, or take back later.  I was, therefore, secretly glad that
his form of putting his argument did not require any answer from
me--for the present, at all events. Doctor Winchester did not seem to
expect any answer--a fact which, when I recognised it, gave my
pleasure, I hardly knew why.  He paused for a while, sitting with his
chin in his hand, his eyes staring at vacancy, whilst his brows were
fixed.  His cigar was held limp between his fingers; he had apparently
forgotten it.  In an even voice, as though commencing exactly where he
had left off, he resumed his argument:


