It was an answer that appalled the most sceptical of us, and we felt
individually that in the presence of such earnest purpose as the
Professor's, a purpose which could thus use the to him most sacred of
things, it was impossible to distrust.  In respectful silence we took
the places assigned to us close round the tomb, but hidden from the
sight of any one approaching.  I pitied the others, especially Arthur.
I had myself been apprenticed by my former visits to this watching
horror, and yet I, who had up to an hour ago repudiated the proofs,
felt my heart sink within me.  Never did tombs look so ghastly white.
Never did cypress, or yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of
funeral gloom.  Never did tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously.
Never did bough creak so mysteriously, and never did the far-away
howling of dogs send such a woeful presage through the night.

There was a long spell of silence, big, aching, void, and then from
the Professor a keen "S-s-s-s!"  He pointed, and far down the avenue of
yews we saw a white figure advance, a dim white figure, which held
something dark at its breast.  The figure stopped, and at the moment a
ray of moonlight fell upon the masses of driving clouds, and showed in
startling prominence a dark-haired woman, dressed in the cerements of
the grave.  We could not see the face, for it was bent down over what
we saw to be a fair-haired child.  There was a pause and a sharp
little cry, such as a child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before
the fire and dreams.  We were starting forward, but the Professor's
warning hand, seen by us as he stood behind a yew tree, kept us back.
And then as we looked the white figure moved forwards again.  It was
now near enough for us to see clearly, and the moonlight still held.
My own heart grew cold as ice, and I could hear the gasp of Arthur, as
we recognized the features of Lucy Westenra.  Lucy Westenra, but yet
how changed.  The sweetness was turned to adamantine, heartless
cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous wantonness.

Van Helsing stepped out, and obedient to his gesture, we all advanced
too.  The four of us ranged in a line before the door of the tomb.  Van
Helsing raised his lantern and drew the slide.  By the concentrated
light that fell on Lucy's face we could see that the lips were crimson
with fresh blood, and that the stream had trickled over her chin and
stained the purity of her lawn death-robe.

We shuddered with horror.  I could see by the tremulous light that
even Van Helsing's iron nerve had failed.  Arthur was next to me, and
if I had not seized his arm and held him up, he would have fallen.

When Lucy, I call the thing that was before us Lucy because it bore
her shape, saw us she drew back with an angry snarl, such as a cat
gives when taken unawares, then her eyes ranged over us.  Lucy's eyes
in form and colour, but Lucy's eyes unclean and full of hell fire,
instead of the pure, gentle orbs we knew.  At that moment the remnant
of my love passed into hate and loathing.  Had she then to be killed,
I could have done it with savage delight.  As she looked, her eyes
blazed with unholy light, and the face became wreathed with a
voluptuous smile.  Oh, God, how it made me shudder to see it!  With a
careless motion, she flung to the ground, callous as a devil, the
child that up to now she had clutched strenuously to her breast,
growling over it as a dog growls over a bone.  The child gave a sharp
cry, and lay there moaning.  There was a cold-bloodedness in the act
which wrung a groan from Arthur.  When she advanced to him with
outstretched arms and a wanton smile he fell back and hid his face in
his hands.

She still advanced, however, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace,
said, "Come to me, Arthur.  Leave these others and come to me.  My
arms are hungry for you.  Come, and we can rest together.  Come, my
husband, come!"

There was something diabolically sweet in her tones, something of the
tinkling of glass when struck, which rang through the brains even of
us who heard the words addressed to another.

As for Arthur, he seemed under a spell, moving his hands from his
face, he opened wide his arms.  She was leaping for them, when Van
Helsing sprang forward and held between them his little golden
crucifix.  She recoiled from it, and, with a suddenly distorted face,
full of rage, dashed past him as if to enter the tomb.

When within a foot or two of the door, however, she stopped, as if
arrested by some irresistible force.  Then she turned, and her face
was shown in the clear burst of moonlight and by the lamp, which had
now no quiver from Van Helsing's nerves.  Never did I see such baffled
malice on a face, and never, I trust, shall such ever be seen again by
mortal eyes.  The beautiful colour became livid, the eyes seemed to
throw out sparks of hell fire, the brows were wrinkled as though the
folds of flesh were the coils of Medusa's snakes, and the lovely,
blood-stained mouth grew to an open square, as in the passion masks of
the Greeks and Japanese.  If ever a face meant death, if looks could
kill, we saw it at that moment.

And so for full half a minute, which seemed an eternity, she remained
between the lifted crucifix and the sacred closing of her means of
entry.

Van Helsing broke the silence by asking Arthur, "Answer me, oh my
friend!  Am I to proceed in my work?"

"Do as you will, friend.  Do as you will.  There can be no horror like
this ever any more."  And he groaned in spirit.

Quincey and I simultaneously moved towards him, and took his arms.  We
could hear the click of the closing lantern as Van Helsing held it
down.  Coming close to the tomb, he began to remove from the chinks
some of the sacred emblem which he had placed there.  We all looked on
with horrified amazement as we saw, when he stood back, the woman,
with a corporeal body as real at that moment as our own, pass through
the interstice where scarce a knife blade could have gone.  We all
felt a glad sense of relief when we saw the Professor calmly restoring
the strings of putty to the edges of the door.

When this was done, he lifted the child and said, "Come now, my
friends.  We can do no more till tomorrow.  There is a funeral at
noon, so here we shall all come before long after that.  The friends
of the dead will all be gone by two, and when the sexton locks the
gate we shall remain.  Then there is more to do, but not like this of
tonight.  As for this little one, he is not much harmed, and by
tomorrow night he shall be well.  We shall leave him where the police
will find him, as on the other night, and then to home."

Coming close to Arthur, he said, "My friend Arthur, you have had a sore
trial, but after, when you look back, you will see how it was
necessary.  You are now in the bitter waters, my child.  By this time
tomorrow you will, please God, have passed them, and have drunk of the
sweet waters.  So do not mourn over-much.  Till then I shall not ask
you to forgive me."

Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and we tried to cheer each other
on the way.  We had left behind the child in safety, and were tired.
So we all slept with more or less reality of sleep.


