"You are quite correct.  They correspond exactly.  And yet when Queen
Tera was laid in her tomb, neither the stars in the Jewel nor the
translucent places in the Coffer corresponded to the position of the
stars in the Constellation as they then were!"

We looked at each other as he paused:  a new light was breaking upon
us. With a ring of mastery in his voice he went on:

"Do you not see the meaning of this?  Does it not throw a light on the
intention of the Queen?  She, who was guided by augury, and magic, and
superstition, naturally chose a time for her resurrection which seemed
to have been pointed out by the High Gods themselves, who had sent
their message on a thunderbolt from other worlds.  When such a time was
fixed by supernal wisdom, would it not be the height of human wisdom to
avail itself of it?  Thus it is"--here his voice deepened and trembled
with the intensity of his feeling--"that to us and our time is given
the opportunity of this wondrous peep into the old world, such as has
been the privilege of none other of our time; which may never be again.

"From first to last the cryptic writing and symbolism of that wondrous
tomb of that wondrous woman is full of guiding light; and the key of
the many mysteries lies in that most wondrous Jewel which she held in
her dead hand over the dead heart, which she hoped and believed would
beat again in a newer and nobler world!

"There are only loose ends now to consider.  Margaret has given us the
true inwardness of the feeling of the other Queen!"  He looked at her
fondly, and stroked her hand as he said it.  "For my own part I
sincerely hope she is right; for in such case it will be a joy, I am
sure, to all of us to assist at such a realisation of hope.  But we
must not go too fast, or believe too much in our present state of
knowledge. The voice that we hearken for comes out of times strangely
other than our own; when human life counted for little, and when the
morality of the time made little account of the removing of obstacles
in the way to achievement of  desire. We must keep our eyes fixed on
the scientific side, and wait for the developments on the psychic side.

"Now, as to this stone box, which we call the Magic Coffer.  As I have
said, I am convinced that it opens only in obedience to some principle
of light, or the exercise of some of its forces at present unknown to
us.  There is here much ground for conjecture and for experiment; for
as yet the scientists have not thoroughly differentiated the kinds, and
powers, and degrees of light.  Without analysing various rays we may, I
think, take it for granted that there are different qualities and
powers of light; and this great field of scientific investigation is
almost virgin soil.  We know as yet so little of natural forces, that
imagination need set no bounds to its flights in considering the
possibilities of the future.  Within but a few years we have made such
discoveries as two centuries ago would have sent the discoverer's to
the flames.  The liquefaction of oxygen; the existence of radium, of
helium, of polonium, of argon; the different powers of Roentgen and
Cathode and Bequerel rays.  And as we may finally prove that there are
different kinds and qualities of light, so we may find that combustion
may have its own powers of differentiation; that there are qualities in
some flames non-existent in others.  It may be that some of the
essential conditions of substance are continuous, even in the
destruction of their bases. Last night I was thinking of this, and
reasoning that as there are certain qualities in some oils which are
not in others, so there may be certain similar or corresponding
qualities or powers in the combinations of each.  I suppose we have all
noticed some time or other that the light of colza oil is not quite the
same as that of paraffin, or that the flames of coal gas and whale oil
are different.  They find it so in the light-houses! All at once it
occurred to me that there might be some special virtue in the oil which
had been found in the jars when Queen Tera's tomb was opened.  These
had not been used to preserve the intestines as usual, so they must
have been placed there for some other purpose.  I remembered that in
Van Huyn's narrative he had commented on the way the jars were sealed.
This was lightly, though effectually; they could be opened without
force.  The jars were themselves preserved in a sarcophagus which,
though of immense strength and hermetically sealed, could be opened
easily.  Accordingly, I went at once to examine the jars.  A little--a
very little of the oil still remained, but it had grown thick in the
two and a half centuries in which the jars had been open.  Still, it
was not rancid; and on examining it I found it was cedar oil, and that
it still exhaled something of its original aroma. This gave me the idea
that it was to be used to fill the lamps.  Whoever had placed the oil
in the jars, and the jars in the sarcophagus, knew that there might be
shrinkage in process of time, even in vases of alabaster, and fully
allowed for it; for each of the jars would have filled the lamps half a
dozen times.  With part of the oil remaining I made some experiments,
therefore, which may give useful results.  You know, Doctor, that cedar
oil, which was much used in the preparation and ceremonials of the
Egyptian dead, has a certain refractive power which we do not find in
other oils.  For instance, we use it on the lenses of our microscopes
to give additional clearness of vision.  Last night I put some in one
of the lamps, and placed it near a translucent part of the Magic
Coffer.  The effect was very great; the glow of light within was fuller
and more intense than I could have imagined, where an electric light
similarly placed had little, if any, effect.  I should have tried
others of the seven lamps, but that my supply of oil ran out. This,
however, is on the road to rectification.  I have sent for more cedar
oil, and expect to have before long an ample supply.  Whatever may
happen from other causes, our experiment shall not, at all events, fail
from this.  We shall see!  We shall see!"

Doctor Winchester had evidently been following the logical process of
the other's mind, for his comment was:

"I do hope that when the light is effective in opening the box, the
mechanism will not be impaired or destroyed."

His doubt as to this gave anxious thought to some of us.


