When I got back to the house already dismally affected, I was still more
sadly downcast at the sight of Mary.  She had her sleeves rolled up over
her strong arms, and was quietly making bread.  I got a bannock from the
dresser and sat down to eat it in silence.

'Are ye wearied, lad?' she asked after a while.

'I am not so much wearied, Mary,' I replied, getting on my feet, 'as I am
weary of delay, and perhaps of Aros too.  You know me well enough to
judge me fairly, say what I like.  Well, Mary, you may be sure of this:
you had better be anywhere but here.'

'I'll be sure of one thing,' she returned: 'I'll be where my duty is.'

'You forget, you have a duty to yourself,' I said.

'Ay, man?' she replied, pounding at the dough; 'will you have found that
in the Bible, now?'

'Mary,' I said solemnly, 'you must not laugh at me just now.  God knows I
am in no heart for laughing.  If we could get your father with us, it
would be best; but with him or without him, I want you far away from
here, my girl; for your own sake, and for mine, ay, and for your father's
too, I want you far--far away from here.  I came with other thoughts; I
came here as a man comes home; now it is all changed, and I have no
desire nor hope but to flee--for that's the word--flee, like a bird out
of the fowler's snare, from this accursed island.'

She had stopped her work by this time.

'And do you think, now,' said she, 'do you think, now, I have neither
eyes nor ears?  Do ye think I havenae broken my heart to have these braws
(as he calls them, God forgive him!) thrown into the sea?  Do ye think I
have lived with him, day in, day out, and not seen what you saw in an
hour or two?  No,' she said, 'I know there's wrong in it; what wrong, I
neither know nor want to know.  There was never an ill thing made better
by meddling, that I could hear of.  But, my lad, you must never ask me to
leave my father.  While the breath is in his body, I'll be with him.  And
he's not long for here, either: that I can tell you, Charlie--he's not
long for here.  The mark is on his brow; and better so--maybe better so.'

I was a while silent, not knowing what to say; and when I roused my head
at last to speak, she got before me.

'Charlie,' she said, 'what's right for me, neednae be right for you.
There's sin upon this house and trouble; you are a stranger; take your
things upon your back and go your ways to better places and to better
folk, and if you were ever minded to come back, though it were twenty
years syne, you would find me aye waiting.'

'Mary Ellen,' I said, 'I asked you to be my wife, and you said as good as
yes.  That's done for good.  Wherever you are, I am; as I shall answer to
my God.'

As I said the words, the wind suddenly burst out raving, and then seemed
to stand still and shudder round the house of Aros.  It was the first
squall, or prologue, of the coming tempest, and as we started and looked
about us, we found that a gloom, like the approach of evening, had
settled round the house.

'God pity all poor folks at sea!' she said.  'We'll see no more of my
father till the morrow's morning.'

And then she told me, as we sat by the fire and hearkened to the rising
gusts, of how this change had fallen upon my uncle.  All last winter he
had been dark and fitful in his mind.  Whenever the Roost ran high, or,
as Mary said, whenever the Merry Men were dancing, he would lie out for
hours together on the Head, if it were at night, or on the top of Aros by
day, watching the tumult of the sea, and sweeping the horizon for a sail.
After February the tenth, when the wealth-bringing wreck was cast ashore
at Sandag, he had been at first unnaturally gay, and his excitement had
never fallen in degree, but only changed in kind from dark to darker.  He
neglected his work, and kept Rorie idle.  They two would speak together
by the hour at the gable end, in guarded tones and with an air of secrecy
and almost of guilt; and if she questioned either, as at first she
sometimes did, her inquiries were put aside with confusion.  Since Rorie
had first remarked the fish that hung about the ferry, his master had
never set foot but once upon the mainland of the Ross.  That once--it was
in the height of the springs--he had passed dryshod while the tide was
out; but, having lingered overlong on the far side, found himself cut off
from Aros by the returning waters.  It was with a shriek of agony that he
had leaped across the gut, and he had reached home thereafter in a fever-
fit of fear.  A fear of the sea, a constant haunting thought of the sea,
appeared in his talk and devotions, and even in his looks when he was
silent.

