At breakfast-time next morning Sir Nathaniel and Mr. Salton were seated
when Adam came hurriedly into the room.

"Any news?" asked his uncle mechanically.

"Four."

"Four what?" asked Sir Nathaniel.

"Snakes," said Adam, helping himself to a grilled kidney.

"Four snakes.  I don't understand."

"Mongoose," said Adam, and then added explanatorily: "I was out with the
mongoose just after three."

"Four snakes in one morning!  Why, I didn't know there were so many on
the Brow"--the local name for the western cliff.  "I hope that wasn't the
consequence of our talk of last night?"

"It was, sir.  But not directly."

"But, God bless my soul, you didn't expect to get a snake like the
Lambton worm, did you?  Why, a mongoose, to tackle a monster like that--if
there were one--would have to be bigger than a haystack."

"These were ordinary snakes, about as big as a walking-stick."

"Well, it's pleasant to be rid of them, big or little.  That is a good
mongoose, I am sure; he'll clear out all such vermin round here," said
Mr. Salton.

Adam went quietly on with his breakfast.  Killing a few snakes in a
morning was no new experience to him.  He left the room the moment
breakfast was finished and went to the study that his uncle had arranged
for him.  Both Sir Nathaniel and Mr. Salton took it that he wanted to be
by himself, so as to avoid any questioning or talk of the visit that he
was to make that afternoon.  They saw nothing further of him till about
half-an-hour before dinner-time.  Then he came quietly into the smoking-
room, where Mr. Salton and Sir Nathaniel were sitting together, ready
dressed.

"I suppose there is no use waiting.  We had better get it over at once,"
remarked Adam.

His uncle, thinking to make things easier for him, said: "Get what over?"

There was a sign of shyness about him at this.  He stammered a little at
first, but his voice became more even as he went on.

"My visit to Mercy Farm."

Mr. Salton waited eagerly.  The old diplomatist simply smiled.

"I suppose you both know that I was much interested yesterday in the
Watfords?"  There was no denial or fending off the question.  Both the
old men smiled acquiescence.  Adam went on: "I meant you to see it--both
of you.  You, uncle, because you are my uncle and the nearest of my own
kin, and, moreover, you couldn't have been more kind to me or made me
more welcome if you had been my own father."  Mr. Salton said nothing.  He
simply held out his hand, and the other took it and held it for a few
seconds.  "And you, sir, because you have shown me something of the same
affection which in my wildest dreams of home I had no right to expect."
He stopped for an instant, much moved.

Sir Nathaniel answered softly, laying his hand on the youth's shoulder.

"You are right, my boy; quite right.  That is the proper way to look at
it.  And I may tell you that we old men, who have no children of our own,
feel our hearts growing warm when we hear words like those."

Then Adam hurried on, speaking with a rush, as if he wanted to come to
the crucial point.

"Mr. Watford had not come in, but Lilla and Mimi were at home, and they
made me feel very welcome.  They have all a great regard for my uncle.  I
am glad of that any way, for I like them all--much.  We were having tea,
when Mr. Caswall came to the door, attended by the negro.  Lilla opened
the door herself.  The window of the living-room at the farm is a large
one, and from within you cannot help seeing anyone coming.  Mr. Caswall
said he had ventured to call, as he wished to make the acquaintance of
all his tenants, in a less formal way, and more individually, than had
been possible to him on the previous day.  The girls made him
welcome--they are very sweet girls those, sir; someone will be very happy
some day there--with either of them."

"And that man may be you, Adam," said Mr. Salton heartily.

A sad look came over the young man's eyes, and the fire his uncle had
seen there died out.  Likewise the timbre left his voice, making it sound
lonely.

"Such might crown my life.  But that happiness, I fear, is not for me--or
not without pain and loss and woe."

"Well, it's early days yet!" cried Sir Nathaniel heartily.

The young man turned on him his eyes, which had now grown excessively
sad.

"Yesterday--a few hours ago--that remark would have given me new hope--new
courage; but since then I have learned too much."

The old man, skilled in the human heart, did not attempt to argue in such
a matter.

"Too early to give in, my boy."

"I am not of a giving-in kind," replied the young man earnestly.  "But,
after all, it is wise to realise a truth.  And when a man, though he is
young, feels as I do--as I have felt ever since yesterday, when I first
saw Mimi's eyes--his heart jumps.  He does not need to learn things.  He
knows."

There was silence in the room, during which the twilight stole on
imperceptibly.  It was Adam who again broke the silence.

"Do you know, uncle, if we have any second sight in our family?"

"No, not that I ever heard about.  Why?"

"Because," he answered slowly, "I have a conviction which seems to answer
all the conditions of second sight."

"And then?" asked the old man, much perturbed.

"And then the usual inevitable.  What in the Hebrides and other places,
where the Sight is a cult--a belief--is called 'the doom'--the court from
which there is no appeal.  I have often heard of second sight--we have
many western Scots in Australia; but I have realised more of its true
inwardness in an instant of this afternoon than I did in the whole of my
life previously--a granite wall stretching up to the very heavens, so
high and so dark that the eye of God Himself cannot see beyond.  Well, if
the Doom must come, it must.  That is all."

The voice of Sir Nathaniel broke in, smooth and sweet and grave.

"Can there not be a fight for it?  There can for most things."

"For most things, yes, but for the Doom, no.  What a man can do I shall
do.  There will be--must be--a fight.  When and where and how I know not,
but a fight there will be.  But, after all, what is a man in such a
case?"

"Adam, there are three of us."  Salton looked at his old friend as he
spoke, and that old friend's eyes blazed.

"Ay, three of us," he said, and his voice rang.

There was again a pause, and Sir Nathaniel endeavoured to get back to
less emotional and more neutral ground.

"Tell us of the rest of the meeting.  Remember we are all pledged to
this.  It is a fight _a l'outrance_, and we can afford to throw away or
forgo no chance."


