20 August.--The case of Renfield grows even more interesting.  He has
now so far quieted that there are spells of cessation from his
passion.  For the first week after his attack he was perpetually
violent.  Then one night, just as the moon rose, he grew quiet, and
kept murmuring to himself.  "Now I can wait.  Now I can wait."

The attendant came to tell me, so I ran down at once to have a look at
him.  He was still in the strait waistcoat and in the padded room, but
the suffused look had gone from his face, and his eyes had something
of their old pleading.  I might almost say, cringing, softness.  I was
satisfied with his present condition, and directed him to be relieved.
The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without
protest.

It was a strange thing that the patient had humour enough to see their
distrust, for, coming close to me, he said in a whisper, all the while
looking furtively at them, "They think I could hurt you!  Fancy me
hurting you!  The fools!"

It was soothing, somehow, to the feelings to find myself disassociated
even in the mind of this poor madman from the others, but all the same
I do not follow his thought.  Am I to take it that I have anything in
common with him, so that we are, as it were, to stand together.  Or
has he to gain from me some good so stupendous that my well being is
needful to Him?  I must find out later on.  Tonight he will not speak.
Even the offer of a kitten or even a full-grown cat will not tempt
him.

He will only say, "I don't take any stock in cats.  I have more to
think of now, and I can wait.  I can wait."

After a while I left him.  The attendant tells me that he was quiet
until just before dawn, and that then he began to get uneasy, and at
length violent, until at last he fell into a paroxysm which exhausted
him so that he swooned into a sort of coma.


. . . Three nights has the same thing happened, violent all day then
quiet from moonrise to sunrise.  I wish I could get some clue to the
cause.  It would almost seem as if there was some influence which came
and went.  Happy thought!  We shall tonight play sane wits against mad
ones.  He escaped before without our help.  Tonight he shall escape
with it.  We shall give him a chance, and have the men ready to follow
in case they are required.


23 August.--"The expected always happens."  How well Disraeli knew
life.  Our bird when he found the cage open would not fly, so all our
subtle arrangements were for nought.  At any rate, we have proved one
thing, that the spells of quietness last a reasonable time.  We shall
in future be able to ease his bonds for a few hours each day.  I have
given orders to the night attendant merely to shut him in the padded
room, when once he is quiet, until the hour before sunrise.  The poor
soul's body will enjoy the relief even if his mind cannot appreciate
it.  Hark!  The unexpected again!  I am called.  The patient has once
more escaped.


Later.--Another night adventure.  Renfield artfully waited until the
attendant was entering the room to inspect.  Then he dashed out past
him and flew down the passage.  I sent word for the attendants to
follow.  Again he went into the grounds of the deserted house, and we
found him in the same place, pressed against the old chapel door.
When he saw me he became furious, and had not the attendants seized
him in time, he would have tried to kill me.  As we were holding him a
strange thing happened.  He suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then
as suddenly grew calm.  I looked round instinctively, but could see
nothing.  Then I caught the patient's eye and followed it, but could
trace nothing as it looked into the moonlight sky, except a big bat,
which was flapping its silent and ghostly way to the west.  Bats
usually wheel about, but this one seemed to go straight on, as if it
knew where it was bound for or had some intention of its own.

The patient grew calmer every instant, and presently said, "You
needn't tie me.  I shall go quietly!"  Without trouble, we came back
to the house.  I feel there is something ominous in his calm, and
shall not forget this night.


