"Thank you, sir," said Adam earnestly, and was silent.  Sir Nathaniel
understood.

After lunch that day, Adam casually asked Sir Nathaniel to come for a
walk with him.  The keen-witted old diplomatist guessed that there must
be some motive behind the suggestion, and he at once agreed.

As soon as they were free from observation, Adam began.

"I am afraid, sir, that there is more going on in this neighbourhood than
most people imagine.  I was out this morning, and on the edge of the
small wood, I came upon the body of a child by the roadside.  At first, I
thought she was dead, and while examining her, I noticed on her neck some
marks that looked like those of teeth."

"Some wild dog, perhaps?" put in Sir Nathaniel.

"Possibly, sir, though I think not--but listen to the rest of my news.  I
glanced around, and to my surprise, I noticed something white moving
among the trees.  I placed the child down carefully, and followed, but I
could not find any further traces.  So I returned to the child and
resumed my examination, and, to my delight, I discovered that she was
still alive.  I chafed her hands and gradually she revived, but to my
disappointment she remembered nothing--except that something had crept up
quietly from behind, and had gripped her round the throat.  Then,
apparently, she fainted."

"Gripped her round the throat!  Then it cannot have been a dog."

"No, sir, that is my difficulty, and explains why I brought you out here,
where we cannot possibly be overheard.  You have noticed, of course, the
peculiar sinuous way in which Lady Arabella moves--well, I feel certain
that the white thing that I saw in the wood was the mistress of Diana's
Grove!"

"Good God, boy, be careful what you say."

"Yes, sir, I fully realise the gravity of my accusation, but I feel
convinced that the marks on the child's throat were human--and made by a
woman."

Adam's companion remained silent for some time, deep in thought.

"Adam, my boy," he said at last, "this matter appears to me to be far
more serious even than you think.  It forces me to break confidence with
my old friend, your uncle--but, in order to spare him, I must do so.  For
some time now, things have been happening in this district that have been
worrying him dreadfully--several people have disappeared, without leaving
the slightest trace; a dead child was found by the roadside, with no
visible or ascertainable cause of death--sheep and other animals have
been found in the fields, bleeding from open wounds.  There have been
other matters--many of them apparently trivial in themselves.  Some
sinister influence has been at work, and I admit that I have suspected
Lady Arabella--that is why I questioned you so closely about the mongoose
and its strange attack upon Lady Arabella.  You will think it strange
that I should suspect the mistress of Diana's Grove, a beautiful woman of
aristocratic birth.  Let me explain--the family seat is near my own
place, Doom Tower, and at one time I knew the family well.  When still a
young girl, Lady Arabella wandered into a small wood near her home, and
did not return.  She was found unconscious and in a high fever--the
doctor said that she had received a poisonous bite, and the girl being at
a delicate and critical age, the result was serious--so much so that she
was not expected to recover.  A great London physician came down but
could do nothing--indeed, he said that the girl would not survive the
night.  All hope had been abandoned, when, to everyone's surprise, Lady
Arabella made a sudden and startling recovery.  Within a couple of days
she was going about as usual!  But to the horror of her people, she
developed a terrible craving for cruelty, maiming and injuring birds and
small animals--even killing them.  This was put down to a nervous
disturbance due to her age, and it was hoped that her marriage to Captain
March would put this right.  However, it was not a happy marriage, and
eventually her husband was found shot through the head.  I have always
suspected suicide, though no pistol was found near the body.  He may have
discovered something--God knows what!--so possibly Lady Arabella may
herself have killed him.  Putting together many small matters that have
come to my knowledge, I have come to the conclusion that the foul White
Worm obtained control of her body, just as her soul was leaving its
earthly tenement--that would explain the sudden revival of energy, the
strange and inexplicable craving for maiming and killing, as well as many
other matters with which I need not trouble you now, Adam.  As I said
just now, God alone knows what poor Captain March discovered--it must
have been something too ghastly for human endurance, if my theory is
correct that the once beautiful human body of Lady Arabella is under the
control of this ghastly White Worm."

Adam nodded.

"But what can we do, sir--it seems a most difficult problem."

"We can do nothing, my boy--that is the important part of it.  It would
be impossible to take action--all we can do is to keep careful watch,
especially as regards Lady Arabella, and be ready to act, promptly and
decisively, if the opportunity occurs."

Adam agreed, and the two men returned to Lesser Hill.



