'I will lay my heart open to you,' answered Markheim.  'This crime on
which you find me is my last.  On my way to it I have learned many
lessons; itself is a lesson, a momentous lesson.  Hitherto I have been
driven with revolt to what I would not; I was a bond-slave to poverty,
driven and scourged.  There are robust virtues that can stand in these
temptations; mine was not so: I had a thirst of pleasure.  But to-day,
and out of this deed, I pluck both warning and riches--both the power and
a fresh resolve to be myself.  I become in all things a free actor in the
world; I begin to see myself all changed, these hands the agents of good,
this heart at peace.  Something comes over me out of the past; something
of what I have dreamed on Sabbath evenings to the sound of the church
organ, of what I forecast when I shed tears over noble books, or talked,
an innocent child, with my mother.  There lies my life; I have wandered a
few years, but now I see once more my city of destination.'

'You are to use this money on the Stock Exchange, I think?' remarked the
visitor; 'and there, if I mistake not, you have already lost some
thousands?'

'Ah,' said Markheim, 'but this time I have a sure thing.'

'This time, again, you will lose,' replied the visitor quietly.

'Ah, but I keep back the half!' cried Markheim.

'That also you will lose,' said the other.

The sweat started upon Markheim's brow.  'Well, then, what matter?' he
exclaimed.  'Say it be lost, say I am plunged again in poverty, shall one
part of me, and that the worse, continue until the end to override the
better?  Evil and good run strong in me, haling me both ways.  I do not
love the one thing, I love all.  I can conceive great deeds,
renunciations, martyrdoms; and though I be fallen to such a crime as
murder, pity is no stranger to my thoughts.  I pity the poor; who knows
their trials better than myself?  I pity and help them; I prize love, I
love honest laughter; there is no good thing nor true thing on earth but
I love it from my heart.  And are my vices only to direct my life, and my
virtues to lie without effect, like some passive lumber of the mind?  Not
so; good, also, is a spring of acts.'

But the visitant raised his finger.  'For six-and-thirty years that you
have been in this world,' said be, 'through many changes of fortune and
varieties of humour, I have watched you steadily fall.  Fifteen years ago
you would have started at a theft.  Three years back you would have
blenched at the name of murder.  Is there any crime, is there any cruelty
or meanness, from which you still recoil?--five years from now I shall
detect you in the fact!  Downward, downward, lies your way; nor can
anything but death avail to stop you.'

'It is true,' Markheim said huskily, 'I have in some degree complied with
evil.  But it is so with all: the very saints, in the mere exercise of
living, grow less dainty, and take on the tone of their surroundings.'

'I will propound to you one simple question,' said the other; 'and as you
answer, I shall read to you your moral horoscope.  You have grown in many
things more lax; possibly you do right to be so--and at any account, it
is the same with all men.  But granting that, are you in any one
particular, however trifling, more difficult to please with your own
conduct, or do you go in all things with a looser rein?'

'In any one?' repeated Markheim, with an anguish of consideration.  'No,'
he added, with despair, 'in none!  I have gone down in all.'

'Then,' said the visitor, 'content yourself with what you are, for you
will never change; and the words of your part on this stage are
irrevocably written down.'

Markheim stood for a long while silent, and indeed it was the visitor who
first broke the silence.  'That being so,' he said, 'shall I show you the
money?'

'And grace?' cried Markheim.

'Have you not tried it?' returned the other.  'Two or three years ago,
did I not see you on the platform of revival meetings, and was not your
voice the loudest in the hymn?'

'It is true,' said Markheim; 'and I see clearly what remains for me by
way of duty.  I thank you for these lessons from my soul; my eyes are
opened, and I behold myself at last for what I am.'

At this moment, the sharp note of the door-bell rang through the house;
and the visitant, as though this were some concerted signal for which he
had been waiting, changed at once in his demeanour.

'The maid!' he cried.  'She has returned, as I forewarned you, and there
is now before you one more difficult passage.  Her master, you must say,
is ill; you must let her in, with an assured but rather serious
countenance--no smiles, no overacting, and I promise you success!  Once
the girl within, and the door closed, the same dexterity that has already
rid you of the dealer will relieve you of this last danger in your path.
Thenceforward you have the whole evening--the whole night, if needful--to
ransack the treasures of the house and to make good your safety.  This is
help that comes to you with the mask of danger.  Up!' he cried; 'up,
friend; your life hangs trembling in the scales: up, and act!'


