As the days went forward he passed from one extreme to another; now
pluming himself on the strength of his determination, now despising his
timid and silly caution.  The former was, perhaps, the true thought of
his heart, and represented the regular tenor of the man's reflections;
but the latter burst forth from time to time with an unruly violence, and
then he would forget all consideration, and go up and down his house and
garden or walk among the fir-woods like one who is beside himself with
remorse.  To equable, steady-minded Will this state of matters was
intolerable; and he determined, at whatever cost, to bring it to an end.
So, one warm summer afternoon he put on his best clothes, took a thorn
switch in his hand, and set out down the valley by the river.  As soon as
he had taken his determination, he had regained at a bound his customary
peace of heart, and he enjoyed the bright weather and the variety of the
scene without any admixture of alarm or unpleasant eagerness.  It was
nearly the same to him how the matter turned out.  If she accepted him he
would have to marry her this time, which perhaps was, all for the best.
If she refused him, he would have done his utmost, and might follow his
own way in the future with an untroubled conscience.  He hoped, on the
whole, she would refuse him; and then, again, as he saw the brown roof
which sheltered her, peeping through some willows at an angle of the
stream, he was half inclined to reverse the wish, and more than half
ashamed of himself for this infirmity of purpose.

Marjory seemed glad to see him, and gave him her hand without affectation
or delay.

'I have been thinking about this marriage,' he began.

'So have I,' she answered.  'And I respect you more and more for a very
wise man.  You understood me better than I understood myself; and I am
now quite certain that things are all for the best as they are.'

'At the same time--,' ventured Will.

'You must be tired,' she interrupted.  'Take a seat and let me fetch you
a glass of wine.  The afternoon is so warm; and I wish you not to be
displeased with your visit.  You must come quite often; once a week, if
you can spare the time; I am always so glad to see my friends.'

'O, very well,' thought Will to himself.  'It appears I was right after
all.'  And he paid a very agreeable visit, walked home again in capital
spirits, and gave himself no further concern about the matter.

For nearly three years Will and Marjory continued on these terms, seeing
each other once or twice a week without any word of love between them;
and for all that time I believe Will was nearly as happy as a man can be.
He rather stinted himself the pleasure of seeing her; and he would often
walk half-way over to the parsonage, and then back again, as if to whet
his appetite.  Indeed there was one corner of the road, whence he could
see the church-spire wedged into a crevice of the valley between sloping
firwoods, with a triangular snatch of plain by way of background, which
he greatly affected as a place to sit and moralise in before returning
homewards; and the peasants got so much into the habit of finding him
there in the twilight that they gave it the name of 'Will o' the Mill's
Corner.'

At the end of the three years Marjory played him a sad trick by suddenly
marrying somebody else.  Will kept his countenance bravely, and merely
remarked that, for as little as he knew of women, he had acted very
prudently in not marrying her himself three years before.  She plainly
knew very little of her own mind, and, in spite of a deceptive manner,
was as fickle and flighty as the rest of them.  He had to congratulate
himself on an escape, he said, and would take a higher opinion of his own
wisdom in consequence.  But at heart, he was reasonably displeased, moped
a good deal for a month or two, and fell away in flesh, to the
astonishment of his serving-lads.

