Then I ran to the window and cried to them.  They looked up at me
stupidly and pointed, but just then the "hetman" of the Szgany came
out, and seeing them pointing to my window, said something, at which
they laughed.

Henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonized entreaty,
would make them even look at me.  They resolutely turned away.  The
leiter-wagons contained great, square boxes, with handles of thick
rope.  These were evidently empty by the ease with which the Slovaks
handled them, and by their resonance as they were roughly moved.

When they were all unloaded and packed in a great heap in one corner
of the yard, the Slovaks were given some money by the Szgany, and
spitting on it for luck, lazily went each to his horse's head.
Shortly afterwards, I heard the crackling of their whips die away in
the distance.


24 June.--Last night the Count left me early, and locked himself into
his own room.  As soon as I dared I ran up the winding stair, and
looked out of the window, which opened South.  I thought I would watch
for the Count, for there is something going on.  The Szgany are
quartered somewhere in the castle and are doing work of some kind.  I
know it, for now and then, I hear a far-away muffled sound as of
mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it must be the end of some
ruthless villainy.

I had been at the window somewhat less than half an hour, when I saw
something coming out of the Count's window.  I drew back and watched
carefully, and saw the whole man emerge.  It was a new shock to me to
find that he had on the suit of clothes which I had worn whilst
travelling here, and slung over his shoulder the terrible bag which I
had seen the women take away.  There could be no doubt as to his
quest, and in my garb, too!  This, then, is his new scheme of evil,
that he will allow others to see me, as they think, so that he may
both leave evidence that I have been seen in the towns or villages
posting my own letters, and that any wickedness which he may do shall
by the local people be attributed to me.

It makes me rage to think that this can go on, and whilst I am shut up
here, a veritable prisoner, but without that protection of the law
which is even a criminal's right and consolation.

I thought I would watch for the Count's return, and for a long time
sat doggedly at the window.  Then I began to notice that there were
some quaint little specks floating in the rays of the moonlight.  They
were like the tiniest grains of dust, and they whirled round and
gathered in clusters in a nebulous sort of way.  I watched them with a
sense of soothing, and a sort of calm stole over me.  I leaned back in
the embrasure in a more comfortable position, so that I could enjoy
more fully the aerial gambolling.

Something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere
far below in the valley, which was hidden from my sight.  Louder it
seemed to ring in my ears, and the floating moats of dust to take new
shapes to the sound as they danced in the moonlight.  I felt myself
struggling to awake to some call of my instincts.  Nay, my very soul
was struggling, and my half-remembered sensibilities were striving to
answer the call.  I was becoming hypnotised!

Quicker and quicker danced the dust.  The moonbeams seemed to quiver
as they went by me into the mass of gloom beyond.  More and more they
gathered till they seemed to take dim phantom shapes.  And then I
started, broad awake and in full possession of my senses, and ran
screaming from the place.

The phantom shapes, which were becoming gradually materialised from
the moonbeams, were those three ghostly women to whom I was doomed.

I fled, and felt somewhat safer in my own room, where there was no
moonlight, and where the lamp was burning brightly.

When a couple of hours had passed I heard something stirring in the
Count's room, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed.  And
then there was silence, deep, awful silence, which chilled me.  With a
beating heart, I tried the door, but I was locked in my prison, and
could do nothing.  I sat down and simply cried.

As I sat I heard a sound in the courtyard without, the agonised cry of
a woman.  I rushed to the window, and throwing it up, peered between
the bars.

There, indeed, was a woman with dishevelled hair, holding her hands
over her heart as one distressed with running.  She was leaning
against the corner of the gateway.  When she saw my face at the window
she threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice laden with menace,
"Monster, give me my child!"

She threw herself on her knees, and raising up her hands, cried the
same words in tones which wrung my heart.  Then she tore her hair and
beat her breast, and abandoned herself to all the violences of
extravagant emotion.  Finally, she threw herself forward, and though I
could not see her, I could hear the beating of her naked hands against
the door.

Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the voice of
the Count calling in his harsh, metallic whisper.  His call seemed to
be answered from far and wide by the howling of wolves.  Before many
minutes had passed a pack of them poured, like a pent-up dam when
liberated, through the wide entrance into the courtyard.

There was no cry from the woman, and the howling of the wolves was but
short.  Before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips.


