After I had supped I drew up the table nearer to the bed and began to
prepare for rest; but in the new position of the light, I was struck by a
picture on the wall.  It represented a woman, still young.  To judge by
her costume and the mellow unity which reigned over the canvas, she had
long been dead; to judge by the vivacity of the attitude, the eyes and
the features, I might have been beholding in a mirror the image of life.
Her figure was very slim and strong, and of a just proportion; red
tresses lay like a crown over her brow; her eyes, of a very golden brown,
held mine with a look; and her face, which was perfectly shaped, was yet
marred by a cruel, sullen, and sensual expression.  Something in both
face and figure, something exquisitely intangible, like the echo of an
echo, suggested the features and bearing of my guide; and I stood awhile,
unpleasantly attracted and wondering at the oddity of the resemblance.
The common, carnal stock of that race, which had been originally designed
for such high dames as the one now looking on me from the canvas, had
fallen to baser uses, wearing country clothes, sitting on the shaft and
holding the reins of a mule cart, to bring home a lodger.  Perhaps an
actual link subsisted; perhaps some scruple of the delicate flesh that
was once clothed upon with the satin and brocade of the dead lady, now
winced at the rude contact of Felipe's frieze.

The first light of the morning shone full upon the portrait, and, as I
lay awake, my eyes continued to dwell upon it with growing complacency;
its beauty crept about my heart insidiously, silencing my scruples one
after another; and while I knew that to love such a woman were to sign
and seal one's own sentence of degeneration, I still knew that, if she
were alive, I should love her.  Day after day the double knowledge of her
wickedness and of my weakness grew clearer.  She came to be the heroine
of many day-dreams, in which her eyes led on to, and sufficiently
rewarded, crimes.  She cast a dark shadow on my fancy; and when I was out
in the free air of heaven, taking vigorous exercise and healthily
renewing the current of my blood, it was often a glad thought to me that
my enchantress was safe in the grave, her wand of beauty broken, her lips
closed in silence, her philtre spilt.  And yet I had a half-lingering
terror that she might not be dead after all, but re-arisen in the body of
some descendant.

Felipe served my meals in my own apartment; and his resemblance to the
portrait haunted me.  At times it was not; at times, upon some change of
attitude or flash of expression, it would leap out upon me like a ghost.
It was above all in his ill tempers that the likeness triumphed.  He
certainly liked me; he was proud of my notice, which he sought to engage
by many simple and childlike devices; he loved to sit close before my
fire, talking his broken talk or singing his odd, endless, wordless
songs, and sometimes drawing his hand over my clothes with an
affectionate manner of caressing that never failed to cause in me an
embarrassment of which I was ashamed.  But for all that, he was capable
of flashes of causeless anger and fits of sturdy sullenness.  At a word
of reproof, I have seen him upset the dish of which I was about to eat,
and this not surreptitiously, but with defiance; and similarly at a hint
of inquisition.  I was not unnaturally curious, being in a strange place
and surrounded by string people; but at the shadow of a question, he
shrank back, lowering and dangerous.  Then it was that, for a fraction of
a second, this rough lad might have been the brother of the lady in the
frame.  But these humours were swift to pass; and the resemblance died
along with them.

In these first days I saw nothing of any one but Felipe, unless the
portrait is to be counted; and since the lad was plainly of weak mind,
and had moments of passion, it may be wondered that I bore his dangerous
neighbourhood with equanimity.  As a matter of fact, it was for some time
irksome; but it happened before long that I obtained over him so complete
a mastery as set my disquietude at rest.

It fell in this way.  He was by nature slothful, and much of a vagabond,
and yet he kept by the house, and not only waited upon my wants, but
laboured every day in the garden or small farm to the south of the
residencia.  Here he would be joined by the peasant whom I had seen on
the night of my arrival, and who dwelt at the far end of the enclosure,
about half a mile away, in a rude out-house; but it was plain to me that,
of these two, it was Felipe who did most; and though I would sometimes
see him throw down his spade and go to sleep among the very plants he had
been digging, his constancy and energy were admirable in themselves, and
still more so since I was well assured they were foreign to his
disposition and the fruit of an ungrateful effort.  But while I admired,
I wondered what had called forth in a lad so shuttle-witted this enduring
sense of duty.  How was it sustained?  I asked myself, and to what length
did it prevail over his instincts?  The priest was possibly his inspirer;
but the priest came one day to the residencia.  I saw him both come and
go after an interval of close upon an hour, from a knoll where I was
sketching, and all that time Felipe continued to labour undisturbed in
the garden.


