I cannot help feeling terribly excited as the time
draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, for somehow I expect that
it will throw some light upon Jonathan's sad experience, and as he
attended poor dear Lucy in her last illness, he can tell me all about
her.  That is the reason of his coming.  It is concerning Lucy and her
sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan.  Then I shall never know the
real truth now!  How silly I am.  That awful journal gets hold of my
imagination and tinges everything with something of its own colour.  Of
course it is about Lucy.  That habit came back to the poor dear, and
that awful night on the cliff must have made her ill.  I had almost
forgotten in my own affairs how ill she was afterwards.  She must have
told him of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, and that I knew
all about it, and now he wants me to tell him what I know, so that he
may understand.  I hope I did right in not saying anything of it to
Mrs. Westenra.  I should never forgive myself if any act of mine, were
it even a negative one, brought harm on poor dear Lucy.  I hope too,
Dr. Van Helsing will not blame me.  I have had so much trouble and
anxiety of late that I feel I cannot bear more just at present.

I suppose a cry does us all good at times, clears the air as other
rain does.  Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset
me, and then Jonathan went away this morning to stay away from me a
whole day and night, the first time we have been parted since our
marriage.  I do hope the dear fellow will take care of himself, and
that nothing will occur to upset him.  It is two o'clock, and the
doctor will be here soon now.  I shall say nothing of Jonathan's
journal unless he asks me.  I am so glad I have typewritten out my own
journal, so that, in case he asks about Lucy, I can hand it to him.
It will save much questioning.

Later.--He has come and gone.  Oh, what a strange meeting, and how it
all makes my head whirl round.  I feel like one in a dream.  Can it be
all possible, or even a part of it?  If I had not read Jonathan's
journal first, I should never have accepted even a possibility.  Poor,
poor, dear Jonathan!  How he must have suffered.  Please the good God,
all this may not upset him again.  I shall try to save him from it.
But it may be even a consolation and a help to him, terrible though it
be and awful in its consequences, to know for certain that his eyes
and ears and brain did not deceive him, and that it is all true.  It
may be that it is the doubt which haunts him, that when the doubt is
removed, no matter which, waking or dreaming, may prove the truth, he
will be more satisfied and better able to bear the shock.  Dr. Van
Helsing must be a good man as well as a clever one if he is Arthur's
friend and Dr. Seward's, and if they brought him all the way from
Holland to look after Lucy.  I feel from having seen him that he is
good and kind and of a noble nature.  When he comes tomorrow I shall
ask him about Jonathan.  And then, please God, all this sorrow and
anxiety may lead to a good end.  I used to think I would like to
practice interviewing.  Jonathan's friend on "The Exeter News" told
him that memory is everything in such work, that you must be able to
put down exactly almost every word spoken, even if you had to refine
some of it afterwards.  Here was a rare interview.  I shall try to
record it verbatim.

It was half-past two o'clock when the knock came.  I took my courage a
deux mains and waited.  In a few minutes Mary opened the door, and
announced "Dr. Van Helsing".

I rose and bowed, and he came towards me, a man of medium weight,
strongly built, with his shoulders set back over a broad, deep chest
and a neck well balanced on the trunk as the head is on the neck.  The
poise of the head strikes me at once as indicative of thought and
power.  The head is noble, well-sized, broad, and large behind the
ears.  The face, clean-shaven, shows a hard, square chin, a large
resolute, mobile mouth, a good-sized nose, rather straight, but with
quick, sensitive nostrils, that seem to broaden as the big bushy brows
come down and the mouth tightens.  The forehead is broad and fine,
rising at first almost straight and then sloping back above two bumps
or ridges wide apart, such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot
possibly tumble over it, but falls naturally back and to the sides.
Big, dark blue eyes are set widely apart, and are quick and tender or
stern with the man's moods.  He said to me,


