I then went to the broken cabinet.  It was evidently a receptacle for
valuable curios; for in it were some great scarabs of gold, agate,
green jasper, amethyst, lapis lazuli, opal, granite, and blue-green
china. None of these things happily were touched.  The bullet had gone
through the back of the cabinet; but no other damage, save the
shattering of the glass, had been done.  I could not but notice the
strange arrangement of the curios on the shelf of the cabinet.  All the
scarabs, rings, amulets, &c. were arranged in an uneven oval round an
exquisitely-carved golden miniature figure of a hawk-headed God crowned
with a disk and plumes.  I did not wait to look further at present, for
my attention was demanded by more pressing things; but I determined to
make a more minute examination when I should have time.  It was evident
that some of the strange Egyptian smell clung to these old curios;
through the broken glass came an added whiff of spice and gum and
bitumen, almost stronger than those I had already noticed as coming
from others in the room.

All this had really taken but a few minutes.  I was surprised when my
eye met, through the chinks between the dark window blinds and the
window cases, the brighter light of the coming dawn.  When I went back
to the sofa and took the tourniquet from Mrs. Grant, she went over and
pulled up the blinds.

It would be hard to imagine anything more ghastly than the appearance
of the room with the faint grey light of early morning coming in upon
it. As the windows faced north, any light that came was a fixed grey
light without any of the rosy possibility of dawn which comes in the
eastern quarter of heaven.  The electric lights seemed dull and yet
glaring; and every shadow was of a hard intensity.  There was nothing
of morning freshness; nothing of the softness of night.  All was hard
and cold and inexpressibly dreary.  The face of the senseless man on
the sofa seemed of a ghastly yellow; and the Nurse's face had taken a
suggestion of green from the shade of the lamp near her.  Only Miss
Trelawny's face looked white; and it was of a pallor which made my
heart ache.  It looked as if nothing on God's earth could ever again
bring back to it the colour of life and happiness.

It was a relief to us all when Doctor Winchester came in, breathless
with running.  He only asked one question:

"Can anyone tell me anything of how this wound was gotten?"  On seeing
the headshake which went round us under his glance, he said no more,
but applied himself to his surgical work.  For an instant he looked up
at the Nurse sitting so still; but then bent himself to his task, a
grave frown contracting his brows.  It was not till the arteries were
tied and the wounds completely dressed that he spoke again, except, of
course, when he had asked for anything to be handed to him or to be
done for him.  When Mr. Trelawny's wounds had been thoroughly cared
for, he said to Miss Trelawny:

"What about Nurse Kennedy?"  She answered at once:

"I really do not know.  I found her when I came into the room at
half-past two o'clock, sitting exactly as she does now.  We have not
moved her, or changed her position.  She has not wakened since.  Even
Sergeant Daw's pistol-shots did not disturb her."

"Pistol-shots?  Have you then discovered any cause for this new
outrage?"  The rest were silent, so I answered:

"We have discovered nothing.  I was in the room watching with the
Nurse. Earlier in the evening I fancied that the mummy smells were
making me drowsy, so I went out and got a respirator.  I had it on when
I came on duty; but it did not keep me from going to sleep.  I awoke to
see the room full of people; that is, Miss Trelawny and Sergeant Daw,
being only half awake and still stupefied by the same scent or
influence which had affected us, fancied that he saw something moving
through the shadowy darkness of the room, and fired twice.  When I rose
out of my chair, with my face swathed in the respirator, he took me for
the cause of the trouble.  Naturally enough, he was about to fire
again, when I was fortunately in time to manifest my identity.  Mr.
Trelawny was lying beside the safe, just as he was found last night;
and was bleeding profusely from the new wound in his wrist.  We lifted
him on the sofa, and made a tourniquet.  That is, literally and
absolutely, all that any of us know as yet.  We have not touched the
knife, which you see lies close by the pool of blood. Look!" I said,
going over and lifting it. "The point is red with the blood which has
dried."

Doctor Winchester stood quite still a few minutes before speaking:

"Then the doings of this night are quite as mysterious as those of last
night?"

"Quite!" I answered.  He said nothing in reply, but turning to Miss
Trelawny said:

"We had better take Nurse Kennedy into another room.  I suppose there
is nothing to prevent it?"

"Nothing!  Please, Mrs. Grant, see that Nurse Kennedy's room is ready;
and ask two of the men to come and carry her in."  Mrs. Grant went out
immediately; and in a few minutes came back saying:

"The room is quite ready; and the men are here."  By her direction two
footmen came into the room and, lifting up the rigid body of Nurse
Kennedy under the supervision of the Doctor, carried her out of the
room.  Miss Trelawny remained with me in the sick chamber, and Mrs.
Grant went with the Doctor into the Nurse's room.

When we were alone Miss Trelawny came over to me, and taking both my
hands in hers, said:

"I hope you won't remember what I said.  I did not mean it, and I was
distraught."  I did not make reply; but I held her hands and kissed
them.  There are different ways of kissing a lady's hands.  This way
was intended as homage and respect; and it was accepted as such in the
high-bred, dignified way which marked Miss Trelawny's bearing and every
movement.  I went over to the sofa and looked down at the senseless
man. The dawn had come much nearer in the last few minutes, and there
was something of the clearness of day in the light.  As I looked at the
stern, cold, set face, now as white as a marble monument in the pale
grey light, I could not but feel that there was some deep mystery
beyond all that had happened within the last twenty-six hours.  Those
beetling brows screened some massive purpose; that high, broad forehead
held some finished train of reasoning, which the broad chin and massive
jaw would help to carry into effect.  As I looked and wondered, there
began to steal over me again that phase of wandering thought which had
last night heralded the approach of sleep.  I resisted it, and held
myself sternly to the present.  This was easier to do when Miss
Trelawny came close to me, and, leaning her forehead against my
shoulder, began to cry silently.  Then all the manhood in me woke, and
to present purpose.  It was of little use trying to speak; words were
inadequate to thought. But we understood each other; she did not draw
away when I put arm protectingly over her shoulder as I used to do with
my little sister long ago when in her childish trouble she would come
to her big brother to be comforted.  That very act or attitude of
protection made me more resolute in my purpose, and seemed to clear my
brain of idle, dreamy wandering in thought.  With an instinct of
greater protection, however, I took away my arm as I heard the Doctor's
footstep outside the door.

When Doctor Winchester came in he looked intently at the patient before
speaking. His brows were set, and his mouth was a thin, hard line.
Presently he said:

"There is much in common between the sleep of your Father and Nurse
Kennedy. Whatever influence has brought it about has probably worked
the same way in both cases.  In Kennedy's case the coma is less marked.
I cannot but feel, however, that with her we may be able to do more and
more quickly than with this patient, as our hands are not tied.  I have
placed her in a draught; and already she shows some signs, though very
faint ones, of ordinary unconsciousness.  The rigidity of her limbs is
less, and her skin seems more sensitive--or perhaps I should say less
insensitive--to pain."

"How is it, then," I asked, "that Mr. Trelawny is still in this state
of insensibility; and yet, so far as we know, his body has not had such
rigidity at all?"

"That I cannot answer.  The problem is one which we may solve in a few
hours; or it may need a few days.  But it will be a useful lesson in
diagnosis to us all; and perhaps to many and many others after us, who
knows!" he added, with the genuine fire of an enthusiast.

As the morning wore on, he flitted perpetually between the two rooms,
watching anxiously over both patients.  He made Mrs. Grant remain with
the Nurse, but either Miss Trelawny or I, generally both of us,
remained with the wounded man. We each managed, however, to get bathed
and dressed; the Doctor and Mrs. Grant remained with Mr. Trelawny
whilst we had breakfast.


