And just at that moment, in a voice that I could scarce have recognised,
my kinsman began swearing and praying in a mingled stream.  I looked at
him; he had fallen on his knees, his face was agonised; at each step of
the castaway's the pitch of his voice rose, the volubility of his
utterance and the fervour of his language redoubled.  I call it prayer,
for it was addressed to God; but surely no such ranting incongruities
were ever before addressed to the Creator by a creature: surely if prayer
can be a sin, this mad harangue was sinful.  I ran to my kinsman, I
seized him by the shoulders, I dragged him to his feet.

'Silence, man,' said I, 'respect your God in words, if not in action.
Here, on the very scene of your transgressions, He sends you an occasion
of atonement.  Forward and embrace it; welcome like a father yon creature
who comes trembling to your mercy.'

With that, I tried to force him towards the black; but he felled me to
the ground, burst from my grasp, leaving the shoulder of his jacket, and
fled up the hillside towards the top of Aros like a deer.  I staggered to
my feet again, bruised and somewhat stunned; the negro had paused in
surprise, perhaps in terror, some halfway between me and the wreck; my
uncle was already far away, bounding from rock to rock; and I thus found
myself torn for a time between two duties.  But I judged, and I pray
Heaven that I judged rightly, in favour of the poor wretch upon the
sands; his misfortune was at least not plainly of his own creation; it
was one, besides, that I could certainly relieve; and I had begun by that
time to regard my uncle as an incurable and dismal lunatic.  I advanced
accordingly towards the black, who now awaited my approach with folded
arms, like one prepared for either destiny.  As I came nearer, he reached
forth his hand with a great gesture, such as I had seen from the pulpit,
and spoke to me in something of a pulpit voice, but not a word was
comprehensible.  I tried him first in English, then in Gaelic, both in
vain; so that it was clear we must rely upon the tongue of looks and
gestures.  Thereupon I signed to him to follow me, which he did readily
and with a grave obeisance like a fallen king; all the while there had
come no shade of alteration in his face, neither of anxiety while he was
still waiting, nor of relief now that he was reassured; if he were a
slave, as I supposed, I could not but judge he must have fallen from some
high place in his own country, and fallen as he was, I could not but
admire his bearing.  As we passed the grave, I paused and raised my hands
and eyes to heaven in token of respect and sorrow for the dead; and he,
as if in answer, bowed low and spread his hands abroad; it was a strange
motion, but done like a thing of common custom; and I supposed it was
ceremonial in the land from which he came.  At the same time he pointed
to my uncle, whom we could just see perched upon a knoll, and touched his
head to indicate that he was mad.

We took the long way round the shore, for I feared to excite my uncle if
we struck across the island; and as we walked, I had time enough to
mature the little dramatic exhibition by which I hoped to satisfy my
doubts.  Accordingly, pausing on a rock, I proceeded to imitate before
the negro the action of the man whom I had seen the day before taking
bearings with the compass at Sandag.  He understood me at once, and,
taking the imitation out of my hands, showed me where the boat was,
pointed out seaward as if to indicate the position of the schooner, and
then down along the edge of the rock with the words 'Espirito Santo,'
strangely pronounced, but clear enough for recognition.  I had thus been
right in my conjecture; the pretended historical inquiry had been but a
cloak for treasure-hunting; the man who had played on Dr. Robertson was
the same as the foreigner who visited Grisapol in spring, and now, with
many others, lay dead under the Roost of Aros: there had their greed
brought them, there should their bones be tossed for evermore.  In the
meantime the black continued his imitation of the scene, now looking up
skyward as though watching the approach of the storm now, in the
character of a seaman, waving the rest to come aboard; now as an officer,
running along the rock and entering the boat; and anon bending over
imaginary oars with the air of a hurried boatman; but all with the same
solemnity of manner, so that I was never even moved to smile.  Lastly, he
indicated to me, by a pantomime not to be described in words, how he
himself had gone up to examine the stranded wreck, and, to his grief and
indignation, had been deserted by his comrades; and thereupon folded his
arms once more, and stooped his head, like one accepting fate.

The mystery of his presence being thus solved for me, I explained to him
by means of a sketch the fate of the vessel and of all aboard her.  He
showed no surprise nor sorrow, and, with a sudden lifting of his open
hand, seemed to dismiss his former friends or masters (whichever they had
been) into God's pleasure.  Respect came upon me and grew stronger, the
more I observed him; I saw he had a powerful mind and a sober and severe
character, such as I loved to commune with; and before we reached the
house of Aros I had almost forgotten, and wholly forgiven him, his
uncanny colour.


