For a while sheer anger mastered me.  It was as if he had during her
life struck Lucy on the face.  I smote the table hard and rose up as I
said to him, "Dr. Van Helsing, are you mad?"

He raised his head and looked at me, and somehow the tenderness of his
face calmed me at once.  "Would I were!" he said.  "Madness were easy
to bear compared with truth like this.  Oh, my friend, why, think
you, did I go so far round, why take so long to tell so simple a
thing?  Was it because I hate you and have hated you all my life?  Was
it because I wished to give you pain?  Was it that I wanted, now so
late, revenge for that time when you saved my life, and from a fearful
death?  Ah no!"

"Forgive me," said I.

He went on, "My friend, it was because I wished to be gentle in the
breaking to you, for I know you have loved that so sweet lady.  But
even yet I do not expect you to believe.  It is so hard to accept at
once any abstract truth, that we may doubt such to be possible when we
have always believed the 'no' of it.  It is more hard still to accept
so sad a concrete truth, and of such a one as Miss Lucy.  Tonight I go
to prove it.  Dare you come with me?"

This staggered me.  A man does not like to prove such a truth, Byron
excepted from the category, jealousy.

    "And prove the very truth he most abhorred."

He saw my hesitation, and spoke, "The logic is simple, no madman's
logic this time, jumping from tussock to tussock in a misty bog.  If
it not be true, then proof will be relief.  At worst it will not harm.
If it be true!  Ah, there is the dread.  Yet every dread should help my
cause, for in it is some need of belief.  Come, I tell you what I
propose.  First, that we go off now and see that child in the
hospital.  Dr. Vincent, of the North Hospital, where the papers say
the child is, is a friend of mine, and I think of yours since you were
in class at Amsterdam.  He will let two scientists see his case, if he
will not let two friends.  We shall tell him nothing, but only that we
wish to learn.  And then . . ."

"And then?"

He took a key from his pocket and held it up.  "And then we spend the
night, you and I, in the churchyard where Lucy lies.  This is the key
that lock the tomb.  I had it from the coffin man to give to Arthur."

My heart sank within me, for I felt that there was some fearful ordeal
before us.  I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up what heart I
could and said that we had better hasten, as the afternoon was
passing.

We found the child awake.  It had had a sleep and taken some food, and
altogether was going on well.  Dr. Vincent took the bandage from its
throat, and showed us the punctures.  There was no mistaking the
similarity to those which had been on Lucy's throat.  They were
smaller, and the edges looked fresher, that was all.  We asked Vincent
to what he attributed them, and he replied that it must have been a
bite of some animal, perhaps a rat, but for his own part, he was
inclined to think it was one of the bats which are so numerous on the
northern heights of London.  "Out of so many harmless ones," he said,
"there may be some wild specimen from the South of a more malignant
species.  Some sailor may have brought one home, and it managed to
escape, or even from the Zoological Gardens a young one may have got
loose, or one be bred there from a vampire.  These things do occur,
you, know.  Only ten days ago a wolf got out, and was, I believe,
traced up in this direction.  For a week after, the children were
playing nothing but Red Riding Hood on the Heath and in every alley in
the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare came along, since then it
has been quite a gala time with them.  Even this poor little mite,
when he woke up today, asked the nurse if he might go away.  When she
asked him why he wanted to go, he said he wanted to play with the
'bloofer lady'."

"I hope," said Van Helsing, "that when you are sending the child home
you will caution its parents to keep strict watch over it.  These
fancies to stray are most dangerous, and if the child were to remain
out another night, it would probably be fatal.  But in any case I
suppose you will not let it away for some days?"

"Certainly not, not for a week at least, longer if the wound is not
healed."

Our visit to the hospital took more time than we had reckoned on, and
the sun had dipped before we came out.  When Van Helsing saw how dark
it was, he said,

"There is not hurry.  It is more late than I thought.  Come, let us
seek somewhere that we may eat, and then we shall go on our way."

We dined at 'Jack Straw's Castle' along with a little crowd of
bicyclists and others who were genially noisy.  About ten o'clock we
started from the inn.  It was then very dark, and the scattered lamps
made the darkness greater when we were once outside their individual
radius.  The Professor had evidently noted the road we were to go, for
he went on unhesitatingly, but, as for me, I was in quite a mixup as
to locality.  As we went further, we met fewer and fewer people, till
at last we were somewhat surprised when we met even the patrol of
horse police going their usual suburban round.  At last we reached the
wall of the churchyard, which we climbed over.  With some little
difficulty, for it was very dark, and the whole place seemed so
strange to us, we found the Westenra tomb.  The Professor took the
key, opened the creaky door, and standing back, politely, but quite
unconsciously, motioned me to precede him.  There was a delicious
irony in the offer, in the courtliness of giving preference on such a
ghastly occasion.  My companion followed me quickly, and cautiously
drew the door to, after carefully ascertaining that the lock was a
falling, and not a spring one.  In the latter case we should have been
in a bad plight.  Then he fumbled in his bag, and taking out a
matchbox and a piece of candle, proceeded to make a light.  The tomb
in the daytime, and when wreathed with fresh flowers, had looked grim
and gruesome enough, but now, some days afterwards, when the flowers
hung lank and dead, their whites turning to rust and their greens to
browns, when the spider and the beetle had resumed their accustomed
dominance, when the time-discoloured stone, and dust-encrusted mortar,
and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished brass, and clouded silver-plating
gave back the feeble glimmer of a candle, the effect was more
miserable and sordid than could have been imagined.  It conveyed
irresistibly the idea that life, animal life, was not the only thing
which could pass away.


