Then there came, if it is possible to describe such a thing, a hush over
even that stillness, as though some form of added solemnity were to be
gone through.  I was not surprised, therefore, when the priest took in
his hands the great golden chalice.  Kneeling, my wife and I partook
together thrice.

When we had risen from our knees and stood for a little while, the priest
took my left hand in his right, and I, by direction of my guide, gave my
right hand to my wife.  And so in a line, the priest leading, we circled
round the table in rhythmic measure.  Those who supported us moved behind
us, holding the crowns over our heads, and replacing them when we
stopped.

After a hymn, sung through the darkness, the priest took off our crowns.
This was evidently the conclusion of the ritual, for the priest placed us
in each other's arms to embrace each other.  Then he blessed us, who were
now man and wife!

The lights went out at once, some as if extinguished, others slowly
fading down to blackness.

Left in the dark, my wife and I sought each other's arms again, and stood
together for a few moments heart to heart, tightly clasping each other,
and kissed each other fervently.

Instinctively we turned to the door of the church, which was slightly
open, so that we could see the moonlight stealing in through the
aperture.  With even steps, she holding me tightly by the left arm--which
is the wife's arm, we passed through the old church and out into the free
air.

Despite all that the gloom had brought me, it was sweet to be in the open
air and together--this quite apart from our new relations to each other.
The moon rode high, and the full light, coming after the dimness or
darkness in the church, seemed as bright as day.  I could now, for the
first time, see my wife's face properly.  The glamour of the moonlight
may have served to enhance its ethereal beauty, but neither moonlight nor
sunlight could do justice to that beauty in its living human splendour.
As I gloried in her starry eyes I could think of nothing else; but when
for a moment my eyes, roving round for the purpose of protection, caught
sight of her whole figure, there was a pang to my heart.  The brilliant
moonlight showed every detail in terrible effect, and I could see that
she wore only her Shroud.  In the moment of darkness, after the last
benediction, before she returned to my arms, she must have removed her
bridal veil.  This may, of course, have been in accordance with the
established ritual of her church; but, all the same, my heart was sore.
The glamour of calling her my very own was somewhat obscured by the
bridal adornment being shorn.  But it made no difference in her sweetness
to me.  Together we went along the path through the wood, she keeping
equal step with me in wifely way.

When we had come through the trees near enough to see the roof of the
Castle, now gilded with the moonlight, she stopped, and looking at me
with eyes full of love, said:

"Here I must leave you!"

"What?"  I was all aghast, and I felt that my chagrin was expressed in
the tone of horrified surprise in my voice.  She went on quickly:

"Alas!  It is impossible that I should go farther--at present!"

"But what is to prevent you?" I queried.  "You are now my wife.  This is
our wedding-night; and surely your place is with me!"  The wail in her
voice as she answered touched me to the quick:

"Oh, I know, I know!  There is no dearer wish in my heart--there can be
none--than to share my husband's home.  Oh, my dear, my dear, if you only
knew what it would be to me to be with you always!  But indeed I may
not--not yet!  I am not free!  If you but knew how much that which has
happened to-night has cost me--or how much cost to others as well as to
myself may be yet to come--you would understand.  Rupert"--it was the
first time she had ever addressed me by name, and naturally it thrilled
me through and through--"Rupert, my husband, only that I trust you with
all the faith which is in perfect love--mutual love, I dare not have done
what I have done this night.  But, dear, I know that you will bear me
out; that your wife's honour is your honour, even as your honour is mine.
My honour is given to this; and you can help me--the only help I can have
at present--by trusting me.  Be patient, my beloved, be patient!  Oh, be
patient for a little longer!  It shall not be for long.  So soon as ever
my soul is freed I shall come to you, my husband; and we shall never part
again.  Be content for a while!  Believe me that I love you with my very
soul; and to keep away from your dear side is more bitter for me than
even it can be for you!  Think, my dear one, I am not as other women are,
as some day you shall clearly understand.  I am at the present, and shall
be for a little longer, constrained by duties and obligations put upon me
by others, and for others, and to which I am pledged by the most sacred
promises--given not only by myself, but by others--and which I must not
forgo.  These forbid me to do as I wish.  Oh, trust me, my beloved--my
husband!"

She held out her hands appealingly.  The moonlight, falling through the
thinning forest, showed her white cerements.  Then the recollection of
all she must have suffered--the awful loneliness in that grim tomb in the
Crypt, the despairing agony of one who is helpless against the
unknown--swept over me in a wave of pity.  What could I do but save her
from further pain?  And this could only be by showing her my faith and
trust.  If she was to go back to that dreadful charnel-house, she would
at least take with her the remembrance that one who loved her and whom
she loved--to whom she had been lately bound in the mystery of
marriage--trusted her to the full.  I loved her more than myself--more
than my own soul; and I was moved by pity so great that all possible
selfishness was merged in its depths.  I bowed my head before her--my
Lady and my Wife--as I said:


