When we were alone, he said to me, "Jack Seward, I don't want to shove
myself in anywhere where I've no right to be, but this is no ordinary
case.  You know I loved that girl and wanted to marry her, but
although that's all past and gone, I can't help feeling anxious about
her all the same.  What is it that's wrong with her?  The Dutchman,
and a fine old fellow he is, I can see that, said that time you two
came into the room, that you must have another transfusion of blood,
and that both you and he were exhausted.  Now I know well that you
medical men speak in camera, and that a man must not expect to know
what they consult about in private.  But this is no common matter, and
whatever it is, I have done my part.  Is not that so?"

"That's so," I said, and he went on.

"I take it that both you and Van Helsing had done already what I did
today.  Is not that so?"

"That's so."

"And I guess Art was in it too.  When I saw him four days ago down at
his own place he looked queer.  I have not seen anything pulled down
so quick since I was on the Pampas and had a mare that I was fond of
go to grass all in a night.  One of those big bats that they call
vampires had got at her in the night, and what with his gorge and the
vein left open, there wasn't enough blood in her to let her stand up,
and I had to put a bullet through her as she lay.  Jack, if you may
tell me without betraying confidence, Arthur was the first, is not
that so?"

As he spoke the poor fellow looked terribly anxious.  He was in a
torture of suspense regarding the woman he loved, and his utter
ignorance of the terrible mystery which seemed to surround her
intensified his pain.  His very heart was bleeding, and it took all
the manhood of him, and there was a royal lot of it, too, to keep him
from breaking down.  I paused before answering, for I felt that I must
not betray anything which the Professor wished kept secret, but
already he knew so much, and guessed so much, that there could be no
reason for not answering, so I answered in the same phrase.

"That's so."

"And how long has this been going on?"

"About ten days."

"Ten days!  Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature
that we all love has had put into her veins within that time the blood
of four strong men.  Man alive, her whole body wouldn't hold it."  Then
coming close to me, he spoke in a fierce half-whisper.  "What took it
out?"

I shook my head.  "That," I said, "is the crux.  Van Helsing is simply
frantic about it, and I am at my wits' end.  I can't even hazard a
guess.  There has been a series of little circumstances which have
thrown out all our calculations as to Lucy being properly watched.
But these shall not occur again.  Here we stay until all be well, or
ill."

Quincey held out his hand.  "Count me in," he said.  "You and the
Dutchman will tell me what to do, and I'll do it."

When she woke late in the afternoon, Lucy's first movement was to feel
in her breast, and to my surprise, produced the paper which Van
Helsing had given me to read.  The careful Professor had replaced it
where it had come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed.  Her
eyes then lit on Van Helsing and on me too, and gladdened.  Then she
looked round the room, and seeing where she was, shuddered.  She gave
a loud cry, and put her poor thin hands before her pale face.

We both understood what was meant, that she had realized to the full
her mother's death.  So we tried what we could to comfort her.
Doubtless sympathy eased her somewhat, but she was very low in thought
and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for a long time.  We told her
that either or both of us would now remain with her all the time, and
that seemed to comfort her.  Towards dusk she fell into a doze.  Here
a very odd thing occurred.  Whilst still asleep she took the paper
from her breast and tore it in two.  Van Helsing stepped over and took
the pieces from her.  All the same, however, she went on with the
action of tearing, as though the material were still in her hands.
Finally she lifted her hands and opened them as though scattering the
fragments.  Van Helsing seemed surprised, and his brows gathered as if
in thought, but he said nothing.


19 September.--All last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid
to sleep, and something weaker when she woke from it.  The Professor
and I took in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment
unattended.  Quincey Morris said nothing about his intention, but I
knew that all night long he patrolled round and round the house.

When the day came, its searching light showed the ravages in poor
Lucy's strength.  She was hardly able to turn her head, and the little
nourishment which she could take seemed to do her no good.  At times
she slept, and both Van Helsing and I noticed the difference in her,
between sleeping and waking.  Whilst asleep she looked stronger,
although more haggard, and her breathing was softer.  Her open mouth
showed the pale gums drawn back from the teeth, which looked
positively longer and sharper than usual.  When she woke the softness
of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her own
self, although a dying one.  In the afternoon she asked for Arthur,
and we telegraphed for him.  Quincey went off to meet him at the
station.


