One day, when Will was about sixteen, a fat young man arrived at sunset
to pass the night.  He was a contented-looking fellow, with a jolly eye,
and carried a knapsack.  While dinner was preparing, he sat in the arbour
to read a book; but as soon as he had begun to observe Will, the book was
laid aside; he was plainly one of those who prefer living people to
people made of ink and paper.  Will, on his part, although he had not
been much interested in the stranger at first sight, soon began to take a
great deal of pleasure in his talk, which was full of good nature and
good sense, and at last conceived a great respect for his character and
wisdom.  They sat far into the night; and about two in the morning Will
opened his heart to the young man, and told him how he longed to leave
the valley and what bright hopes he had connected with the cities of the
plain.  The young man whistled, and then broke into a smile.

'My young friend,' he remarked, 'you are a very curious little fellow to
be sure, and wish a great many things which you will never get.  Why, you
would feel quite ashamed if you knew how the little fellows in these
fairy cities of yours are all after the same sort of nonsense, and keep
breaking their hearts to get up into the mountains.  And let me tell you,
those who go down into the plains are a very short while there before
they wish themselves heartily back again.  The air is not so light nor so
pure; nor is the sun any brighter.  As for the beautiful men and women,
you would see many of them in rags and many of them deformed with
horrible disorders; and a city is so hard a place for people who are poor
and sensitive that many choose to die by their own hand.'

'You must think me very simple,' answered Will.  'Although I have never
been out of this valley, believe me, I have used my eyes.  I know how one
thing lives on another; for instance, how the fish hangs in the eddy to
catch his fellows; and the shepherd, who makes so pretty a picture
carrying home the lamb, is only carrying it home for dinner.  I do not
expect to find all things right in your cities.  That is not what
troubles me; it might have been that once upon a time; but although I
live here always, I have asked many questions and learned a great deal in
these last years, and certainly enough to cure me of my old fancies.  But
you would not have me die like a dog and not see all that is to be seen,
and do all that a man can do, let it be good or evil? you would not have
me spend all my days between this road here and the river, and not so
much as make a motion to be up and live my life?--I would rather die out
of hand,' he cried, 'than linger on as I am doing.'

'Thousands of people,' said the young man, 'live and die like you, and
are none the less happy.'

'Ah!' said Will, 'if there are thousands who would like, why should not
one of them have my place?'

It was quite dark; there was a hanging lamp in the arbour which lit up
the table and the faces of the speakers; and along the arch, the leaves
upon the trellis stood out illuminated against the night sky, a pattern
of transparent green upon a dusky purple.  The fat young man rose, and,
taking Will by the arm, led him out under the open heavens.

'Did you ever look at the stars?' he asked, pointing upwards.

'Often and often,' answered Will.

'And do you know what they are?'

'I have fancied many things.'

'They are worlds like ours,' said the young man.  'Some of them less;
many of them a million times greater; and some of the least sparkles that
you see are not only worlds, but whole clusters of worlds turning about
each other in the midst of space.  We do not know what there may be in
any of them; perhaps the answer to all our difficulties or the cure of
all our sufferings: and yet we can never reach them; not all the skill of
the craftiest of men can fit out a ship for the nearest of these our
neighbours, nor would the life of the most aged suffice for such a
journey.  When a great battle has been lost or a dear friend is dead,
when we are hipped or in high spirits, there they are unweariedly shining
overhead.  We may stand down here, a whole army of us together, and shout
until we break our hearts, and not a whisper reaches them.  We may climb
the highest mountain, and we are no nearer them.  All we can do is to
stand down here in the garden and take off our hats; the starshine lights
upon our heads, and where mine is a little bald, I dare say you can see
it glisten in the darkness.  The mountain and the mouse.  That is like to
be all we shall ever have to do with Arcturus or Aldebaran.  Can you
apply a parable?' he added, laying his hand upon Will's shoulder.  'It is
not the same thing as a reason, but usually vastly more convincing.'

Will hung his head a little, and then raised it once more to heaven.  The
stars seemed to expand and emit a sharper brilliancy; and as he kept
turning his eyes higher and higher, they seemed to increase in multitude
under his gaze.

'I see,' he said, turning to the young man.  'We are in a rat-trap.'

'Something of that size.  Did you ever see a squirrel turning in a cage?
and another squirrel sitting philosophically over his nuts?  I needn't
ask you which of them looked more of a fool.'




