"'I could get no further, however.  There was evidently something
wanting.  All at once it came to me that if light could have some
effect there should be in the tomb some means of producing light, for
there could not be starlight in the Mummy Pit in the cavern.  Then the
whole thing seemed to become clear.  On the bloodstone table, which has
a hollow carved in its top, into which the bottom of the coffer fits, I
laid the Magic Coffer; and I at once saw that the odd protuberances so
carefully wrought in the substance of the stone corresponded in a way
to the stars in the constellation.  These, then, were to hold lights.

"'Eureka!' I cried.  'All we want now is the lamps.'"  I tried placing
the electric lights on, or close to, the protuberances.  But the glow
never came to the stone. So the conviction grew on me that there were
special lamps made for the purpose. If we could find them, a step on
the road to solving the mystery should be gained.

"'But what about the lamps?' I asked.  'Where are they?  When are we to
discover them?  How are we to know them if we do find them?  What--"

"He stopped me at once:

"'One thing at a time!' he said quietly.  'Your first question contains
all the rest. Where are these lamps?  I shall tell you:  In the tomb!'

"'In the tomb!' I repeated in surprise.  'Why you and I searched the
place ourselves from end to end; and there was not a sign of a lamp.
Not a sign of anything remaining when we came away the first time; or
on the second, except the bodies of the Arabs.'

"Whilst I was speaking, he had uncoiled some large sheets of paper
which he had brought in his hand from his own room.  These he spread
out on the great table, keeping their edges down with books and
weights.  I knew them at a glance; they were the careful copies which
he had made of our first transcripts from the writing in the tomb.
When he had all ready, he turned to me and said slowly:

"'Do you remember wondering, when we examined the tomb, at the lack of
one thing which is usually found in such a tomb?'

"'Yes!  There was no serdab.'

"The serdab, I may perhaps explain," said Mr. Corbeck to me, "is a sort
of niche built or hewn in the wall of a tomb.  Those which have as yet
been examined bear no inscriptions, and contain only effigies of the
dead for whom the tomb was made." Then he went on with his narrative:

"Trelawny, when he saw that I had caught his meaning, went on speaking
with something of his old enthusiasm:

"'I have come to the conclusion that there must be a serdab--a secret
one.  We were dull not to have thought of it before.  We might have
known that the maker of such a tomb--a woman, who had shown in other
ways such a sense of beauty and completeness, and who had finished
every detail with a feminine richness of elaboration--would not have
neglected such an architectural feature.  Even if it had not its own
special significance in ritual, she would have had it as an adornment.
Others had had it, and she liked her own work to be complete.  Depend
upon it, there was--there is--a serdab; and that in it, when it is
discovered, we shall find the lamps.  Of course, had we known then what
we now know or at all events surmise, that there were lamps, we might
have suspected some hidden spot, some cachet.  I am going to ask you to
go out to Egypt again; to seek the tomb; to find the serdab; and to
bring back the lamps!'"

"'And if I find there is no serdab; or if discovering it I find no
lamps in it, what then?' He smiled grimly with that saturnine smile of
his, so rarely seen for years past, as he spoke slowly:

"'Then you will have to hustle till you find them!'

"'Good!' I said.  He pointed to one of the sheets.

"'Here are the transcripts from the Chapel at the south and the east.
I have been looking over the writings again; and I find that in seven
places round this corner are the symbols of the constellation which we
call the Plough, which Queen Tera held to rule her birth and her
destiny.  I have examined them carefully, and I notice that they are
all representations of the grouping of the stars, as the constellation
appears in different parts of the heavens.  They are all astronomically
correct; and as in the real sky the Pointers indicate the Pole Star, so
these all point to one spot in the wall where usually the serdab is to
be found!'

"'Bravo!' I shouted, for such a piece of reasoning demanded applause.
He seemed pleased as he went on:

"'When you are in the tomb, examine this spot.  There is probably some
spring or mechanical contrivance for opening the receptacle.  What it
may be, there is no use guessing.  You will know what best to do, when
you are on the spot.'

"I started the next week for Egypt; and never rested till I stood again
in the tomb.  I had found some of our old following; and was fairly
well provided with help.  The country was now in a condition very
different to that in which it had been sixteen years before; there was
no need for troops or armed men.


