Where is John Stanley mining now?  Where is S. Chapman, within
whose hospitable walls we were to lodge?  The date was but five
years old, but in that time the world had changed for Silverado;
like Palmyra in the desert, it had outlived its people and its
purpose; we camped, like Layard, amid ruins, and these names spoke
to us of prehistoric time.  A boot-jack, a pair of boots, a dog-
hutch, and these bills of Mr. Chapman's were the only speaking
relics that we disinterred from all that vast Silverado rubbish-
heap; but what would I not have given to unearth a letter, a
pocket-book, a diary, only a ledger, or a roll of names, to take me
back, in a more personal manner, to the past?  It pleases me,
besides, to fancy that Stanley or Chapman, or one of their
companions, may light upon this chronicle, and be struck by the
name, and read some news of their anterior home, coming, as it
were, out of a subsequent epoch of history in that quarter of the
world.

As we were tumbling the mingled rubbish on the floor, kicking it
with our feet, and groping for these written evidences of the past,
Sam, with a somewhat whitened face, produced a paper bag.  "What's
this?" said he.  It contained a granulated powder, something the
colour of Gregory's Mixture, but rosier; and as there were several
of the bags, and each more or less broken, the powder was spread
widely on the floor.  Had any of us ever seen giant powder?  No,
nobody had; and instantly there grew up in my mind a shadowy
belief, verging with every moment nearer to certitude, that I had
somewhere heard somebody describe it as just such a powder as the
one around us.  I have learnt since that it is a substance not
unlike tallow, and is made up in rolls for all the world like
tallow candles.

Fanny, to add to our happiness, told us a story of a gentleman who
had camped one night, like ourselves, by a deserted mine.  He was a
handy, thrifty fellow, and looked right and left for plunder, but
all he could lay his hands on was a can of oil.  After dark he had
to see to the horses with a lantern; and not to miss an
opportunity, filled up his lamp from the oil can.  Thus equipped,
he set forth into the forest.  A little while after, his friends
heard a loud explosion; the mountain echoes bellowed, and then all
was still.  On examination, the can proved to contain oil, with the
trifling addition of nitro-glycerine; but no research disclosed a
trace of either man or lantern.

It was a pretty sight, after this anecdote, to see us sweeping out
the giant powder.  It seemed never to be far enough away.  And,
after all, it was only some rock pounded for assay.

So much for the lower room.  We scraped some of the rougher dirt
off the floor, and left it.  That was our sitting-room and kitchen,
though there was nothing to sit upon but the table, and no
provision for a fire except a hole in the roof of the room above,
which had once contained the chimney of a stove.

To that upper room we now proceeded.  There were the eighteen bunks
in a double tier, nine on either hand, where from eighteen to
thirty-six miners had once snored together all night long, John
Stanley, perhaps, snoring loudest.  There was the roof, with a hole
in it through which the sun now shot an arrow.  There was the
floor, in much the same state as the one below, though, perhaps,
there was more hay, and certainly there was the added ingredient of
broken glass, the man who stole the window-frames having apparently
made a miscarriage with this one.  Without a broom, without hay or
bedding, we could but look about us with a beginning of despair.
The one bright arrow of day, in that gaunt and shattered barrack,
made the rest look dirtier and darker, and the sight drove us at
last into the open.

Here, also, the handiwork of man lay ruined:  but the plants were
all alive and thriving; the view below was fresh with the colours
of nature; and we had exchanged a dim, human garret for a corner,
even although it were untidy, of the blue hall of heaven.  Not a
bird, not a beast, not a reptile.  There was no noise in that part
of the world, save when we passed beside the staging, and heard the
water musically falling in the shaft.

We wandered to and fro.  We searched among that drift of lumber-
wood and iron, nails and rails, and sleepers and the wheels of
tracks.  We gazed up the cleft into the bosom of the mountain.  We
sat by the margin of the dump and saw, far below us, the green
treetops standing still in the clear air.  Beautiful perfumes,
breaths of bay, resin, and nutmeg, came to us more often and grew
sweeter and sharper as the afternoon declined.  But still there was
no word of Hanson.

I set to with pick and shovel, and deepened the pool behind the
shaft, till we were sure of sufficient water for the morning; and
by the time I had finished, the sun had begun to go down behind the
mountain shoulder, the platform was plunged in quiet shadow, and a
chill descended from the sky.  Night began early in our cleft.
Before us, over the margin of the dump, we could see the sun still
striking aslant into the wooded nick below, and on the
battlemented, pine-bescattered ridges on the farther side.

There was no stove, of course, and no hearth in our lodging, so we
betook ourselves to the blacksmith's forge across the platform.  If
the platform be taken as a stage, and the out-curving margin of the
dump to represent the line of the foot-lights, then our house would
be the first wing on the actor's left, and this blacksmith's forge,
although no match for it in size, the foremost on the right.  It
was a low, brown cottage, planted close against the hill, and
overhung by the foliage and peeling boughs of a madrona thicket.
Within it was full of dead leaves and mountain dust, and rubbish
from the mine.  But we soon had a good fire brightly blazing, and
sat close about it on impromptu seats.  Chuchu, the slave of sofa-
cushions, whimpered for a softer bed; but the rest of us were
greatly revived and comforted by that good creature-fire, which
gives us warmth and light and companionable sounds, and colours up
the emptiest building with better than frescoes.  For a while it
was even pleasant in the forge, with the blaze in the midst, and a
look over our shoulders on the woods and mountains where the day
was dying like a dolphin.


