To make matters worse, he was in love.  The girl he loved was Laura
Merton, the daughter of a retired Colonel who had lost his temper
and his digestion in India, and had never found either of them
again.  Laura adored him, and he was ready to kiss her shoe-strings.
They were the handsomest couple in London, and had not a penny-piece
between them.  The Colonel was very fond of Hughie, but would not
hear of any engagement.

'Come to me, my boy, when you have got ten thousand pounds of your
own, and we will see about it,' he used to say; and Hughie looked
very glum in those days, and had to go to Laura for consolation.

One morning, as he was on his way to Holland Park, where the Mertons
lived, he dropped in to see a great friend of his, Alan Trevor.
Trevor was a painter.  Indeed, few people escape that nowadays.  But
he was also an artist, and artists are rather rare.  Personally he
was a strange rough fellow, with a freckled face and a red ragged
beard.  However, when he took up the brush he was a real master, and
his pictures were eagerly sought after.  He had been very much
attracted by Hughie at first, it must be acknowledged, entirely on
account of his personal charm.  'The only people a painter should
know,' he used to say, 'are people who are bete and beautiful,
people who are an artistic pleasure to look at and an intellectual
repose to talk to.  Men who are dandies and women who are darlings
rule the world, at least they should do so.'  However, after he got
to know Hughie better, he liked him quite as much for his bright,
buoyant spirits and his generous, reckless nature, and had given him
the permanent entree to his studio.

When Hughie came in he found Trevor putting the finishing touches to
a wonderful life-size picture of a beggar-man.  The beggar himself
was standing on a raised platform in a corner of the studio.  He was
a wizened old man, with a face like wrinkled parchment, and a most
piteous expression.  Over his shoulders was flung a coarse brown
cloak, all tears and tatters; his thick boots were patched and
cobbled, and with one hand he leant on a rough stick, while with the
other he held out his battered hat for alms.

'What an amazing model!' whispered Hughie, as he shook hands with
his friend.

'An amazing model?' shouted Trevor at the top of his voice; 'I
should think so!  Such beggars as he are not to be met with every
day.  A trouvaille, mon cher; a living Velasquez!  My stars! what an
etching Rembrandt would have made of him!'

'Poor old chap!' said Hughie, 'how miserable he looks!  But I
suppose, to you painters, his face is his fortune?'

'Certainly,' replied Trevor, 'you don't want a beggar to look happy,
do you?'

'How much does a model get for sitting?' asked Hughie, as he found
himself a comfortable seat on a divan.

'A shilling an hour.'

'And how much do you get for your picture, Alan?'

'Oh, for this I get two thousand!'

'Pounds?'

'Guineas.  Painters, poets, and physicians always get guineas.'

'Well, I think the model should have a percentage,' cried Hughie,
laughing; 'they work quite as hard as you do.'

'Nonsense, nonsense!  Why, look at the trouble of laying on the
paint alone, and standing all day long at one's easel!  It's all
very well, Hughie, for you to talk, but I assure you that there are
moments when Art almost attains to the dignity of manual labour.
But you mustn't chatter; I'm very busy.  Smoke a cigarette, and keep
quiet.'

After some time the servant came in, and told Trevor that the
framemaker wanted to speak to him.

'Don't run away, Hughie,' he said, as he went out, 'I will be back
in a moment.'


