Through the exertions of Sir Charles Newton, to whom every student
of classic art should be grateful, some of the wonderful treasures
so long immured in the grimy vaults of the British Museum have at
last been brought to light, and the new Sculpture Room now opened
to the public will amply repay the trouble of a visit, even from
those to whom art is a stumbling-block and a rock of offence.  For
setting aside the mere beauty of form, outline and mass, the grace
and loveliness of design and the delicacy of technical treatment,
here we have shown to us what the Greeks and Romans thought about
death; and the philosopher, the preacher, the practical man of the
world, and even the Philistine himself, cannot fail to be touched
by these "sermons in stones," with their deep significance, their
fertile suggestion, their plain humanity.  Common tombstones they
are, most of them, the work not of famous artists but of simple
handicraftsmen, only they were wrought in days when every
handicraft was an art.  The finest specimens, from the purely
artistic point of view, are undoubtedly the two stelai found at
Athens.  They are both the tombstones of young Greek athletes.  In
one the athlete is represented handing his strigil to his slave, in
the other the athlete stands alone, strigil in hand.  They do not
belong to the greatest period of Greek art, they have not the grand
style of the Phidian age, but they are beautiful for all that, and
it is impossible not to be fascinated by their exquisite grace and
by the treatment which is so simple in its means, so subtle in its
effect.  All the tombstones, however, are full of interest.  Here
is one of two ladies of Smyrna who were so remarkable in their day
that the city voted them honorary crowns; here is a Greek doctor
examining a little boy who is suffering from indigestion; here is
the memorial of Xanthippus who, probably, was a martyr to gout, as
he is holding in his hand the model of a foot, intended, no doubt,
as a votive offering to some god.  A lovely stele from Rhodes gives
us a family group.  The husband is on horseback and is bidding
farewell to his wife, who seems as if she would follow him but is
being held back by a little child.  The pathos of parting from
those we love is the central motive of Greek funeral art.  It is
repeated in every possible form, and each mute marble stone seems
to murmur [Greek text].  Roman art is different.  It introduces
vigorous and realistic portraiture and deals with pure family life
far more frequently than Greek art does.  They are very ugly, those
stern-looking Roman men and women whose portraits are exhibited on
their tombs, but they seem to have been loved and respected by
their children and their servants.  Here is the monument of
Aphrodisius and Atilia, a Roman gentleman and his wife, who died in
Britain many centuries ago, and whose tombstone was found in the
Thames; and close by it stands a stele from Rome with the busts of
an old married couple who are certainly marvellously ill-favoured.
The contrast between the abstract Greek treatment of the idea of
death and the Roman concrete realization of the individuals who
have died is extremely curious.

Besides the tombstones, the new Sculpture Room contains some most
fascinating examples of Roman decorative art under the Emperors.
The most wonderful of all, and this alone is worth a trip to
Bloomsbury, is a bas-relief representing a marriage scene, Juno
Pronuba is joining the hands of a handsome young noble and a very
stately lady.  There is all the grace of Perugino in this marble,
all the grace of Raphael even.  The date of it is uncertain, but
the particular cut of the bridegroom's beard seems to point to the
time of the Emperor Hadrian.  It is clearly the work of Greek
artists and is one of the most beautiful bas-reliefs in the whole
Museum.  There is something in it which reminds one of the music
and the sweetness of Propertian verse.  Then we have delightful
friezes of children.  One representing children playing on musical
instruments might have suggested much of the plastic art of
Florence.  Indeed, as we view these marbles it is not difficult to
see whence the Renaissance sprang and to what we owe the various
forms of Renaissance art.  The frieze of the Muses, each of whom
wears in her hair a feather plucked from the wings of the
vanquished sirens, is extremely fine; there is a lovely little bas-
relief of two cupids racing in chariots; and the frieze of
recumbent Amazons has some splendid qualities of design.  A frieze
of children playing with the armour of the god Mars should also be
mentioned.  It is full of fancy and delicate humour.

 We hope that some more of the hidden treasures will shortly be
catalogued and shown.  In the vaults at present there is a very
remarkable bas-relief of the marriage of Cupid and Psyche, and
another representing the professional mourners weeping over the
body of the dead.  The fine cast of the Lion of Chaeronea should
also be brought up, and so should the stele with the marvellous
portrait of the Roman slave.  Economy is an excellent public
virtue, but the parsimony that allows valuable works of art to
remain in the grim and gloom of a damp cellar is little short of a
detestable public vice.

