He was a very selfish Giant.

The poor children had now nowhere to play.  They tried to play on
the road, but the road was very dusty and full of hard stones, and
they did not like it.  They used to wander round the high wall when
their lessons were over, and talk about the beautiful garden
inside.  "How happy we were there," they said to each other.

Then the Spring came, and all over the country there were little
blossoms and little birds.  Only in the garden of the Selfish Giant
it was still winter.  The birds did not care to sing in it as there
were no children, and the trees forgot to blossom.  Once a
beautiful flower put its head out from the grass, but when it saw
the notice-board it was so sorry for the children that it slipped
back into the ground again, and went off to sleep.  The only people
who were pleased were the Snow and the Frost.  "Spring has
forgotten this garden," they cried, "so we will live here all the
year round."  The Snow covered up the grass with her great white
cloak, and the Frost painted all the trees silver.  Then they
invited the North Wind to stay with them, and he came.  He was
wrapped in furs, and he roared all day about the garden, and blew
the chimney-pots down.  "This is a delightful spot," he said, "we
must ask the Hail on a visit."  So the Hail came.  Every day for
three hours he rattled on the roof of the castle till he broke most
of the slates, and then he ran round and round the garden as fast
as he could go.  He was dressed in grey, and his breath was like
ice.

"I cannot understand why the Spring is so late in coming," said the
Selfish Giant, as he sat at the window and looked out at his cold
white garden; "I hope there will be a change in the weather."

But the Spring never came, nor the Summer.  The Autumn gave golden
fruit to every garden, but to the Giant's garden she gave none.
"He is too selfish," she said.  So it was always Winter there, and
the North Wind, and the Hail, and the Frost, and the Snow danced
about through the trees.

One morning the Giant was lying awake in bed when he heard some
lovely music.  It sounded so sweet to his ears that he thought it
must be the King's musicians passing by.  It was really only a
little linnet singing outside his window, but it was so long since
he had heard a bird sing in his garden that it seemed to him to be
the most beautiful music in the world.  Then the Hail stopped
dancing over his head, and the North Wind ceased roaring, and a
delicious perfume came to him through the open casement.  "I
believe the Spring has come at last," said the Giant; and he jumped
out of bed and looked out.

What did he see?

He saw a most wonderful sight.  Through a little hole in the wall
the children had crept in, and they were sitting in the branches of
the trees.  In every tree that he could see there was a little
child.  And the trees were so glad to have the children back again
that they had covered themselves with blossoms, and were waving
their arms gently above the children's heads.  The birds were
flying about and twittering with delight, and the flowers were
looking up through the green grass and laughing.  It was a lovely
scene, only in one corner it was still winter.  It was the farthest
corner of the garden, and in it was standing a little boy.  He was
so small that he could not reach up to the branches of the tree,
and he was wandering all round it, crying bitterly.  The poor tree
was still quite covered with frost and snow, and the North Wind was
blowing and roaring above it.  "Climb up! little boy," said the
Tree, and it bent its branches down as low as it could; but the boy
was too tiny.

