It was on the ninth of November, the eve of his own thirty-eighth
birthday, as he often remembered afterwards.

He was walking home about eleven o'clock from Lord Henry's, where he had
been dining, and was wrapped in heavy furs, as the night was cold and
foggy. At the corner of Grosvenor Square and South Audley Street a man
passed him in the mist, walking very fast, and with the collar of his
grey ulster turned up. He had a bag in his hand. Dorian recognised him.
It was Basil Hallward. A strange sense of fear, for which he could not
account, came over him. He made no sign of recognition, and went on
quickly in the direction of his own house.

But Hallward had seen him. Dorian heard him first stopping on the
pavement, and then hurrying after him. In a few moments his hand was on
his arm.

"Dorian! What an extraordinary piece of luck! I have been waiting for
you in your library ever since nine o'clock. Finally I took pity on your
tired servant, and told him to go to bed, as he let me out. I am off to
Paris by the midnight train, and I particularly wanted to see you before
I left. I thought it was you, or rather your fur coat, as you passed me.
But I wasn't quite sure. Didn't you recognise me?"

"In this fog, my dear Basil? Why, I can't even recognise Grosvenor
Square. I believe my house is somewhere about here, but I don't feel at
all certain about it. I am sorry you are going away, as I have not seen
you for ages. But I suppose you will be back soon?"

"No: I am going to be out of England for six months. I intend to take a
studio in Paris, and shut myself up till I have finished a great picture
I have in my head. However, it wasn't about myself I wanted to talk.
Here we are at your door. Let me come in for a moment. I have something
to say to you."

"I shall be charmed. But won't you miss your train?" said Dorian Gray,
languidly, as he passed up the steps and opened the door with his
latch-key.

The lamp-light struggled out through the fog, and Hallward looked at his
watch. "I have heaps of time," he answered. "The train doesn't go till
twelve-fifteen, and it is only just eleven. In fact, I was on my way to
the club to look for you, when I met you. You see, I shan't have any
delay about luggage, as I have sent on my heavy things. All I have with
me is in this bag, and I can easily get to Victoria in twenty minutes."

Dorian looked at him and smiled. "What a way for a fashionable painter
to travel! A Gladstone bag, and an ulster! Come in, or the fog will get
into the house. And mind you don't talk about anything serious. Nothing
is serious nowadays. At least nothing should be."

Hallward shook his head as he entered, and followed Dorian into the
library. There was a bright wood fire blazing in the large open hearth.
The lamps were lit, and an open Dutch silver spirit-case stood, with
some siphons of soda-water and large cut-glass tumblers, on a little
marqueterie table.

"You see your servant made me quite at home, Dorian. He gave me
everything I wanted, including your best gold-tipped cigarettes. He is a
most hospitable creature. I like him much better than the Frenchman you
used to have. What has become of the Frenchman, by the bye?"

Dorian shrugged his shoulders. "I believe he married Lady Radley's
maid, and has established her in Paris as an English dressmaker.
_Anglomanie_ is very fashionable over there now, I hear. It seems silly
of the French, doesn't it? But--do you know?--he was not at all a bad
servant. I never liked him, but I had nothing to complain about. One
often imagines things that are quite absurd. He was really very devoted
to me, and seemed quite sorry when he went away. Have another
brandy-and-soda? Or would you like hock-and-seltzer? I always take
hock-and-seltzer myself. There is sure to be some in the next room."

"Thanks, I won't have anything more," said the painter, taking his cap
and coat off, and throwing them on the bag that he had placed in the
corner. "And now, my dear fellow, I want to speak to you seriously.
Don't frown like that. You make it so much more difficult for me."

"What is it all about?" cried Dorian, in his petulant way, flinging
himself down on the sofa. "I hope it is not about myself. I am tired of
myself to-night. I should like to be somebody else."

"It is about yourself," answered Hallward, in his grave, deep voice,
"and I must say it to you. I shall only keep you half an hour."

Dorian sighed, and lit a cigarette. "Half an hour!" he murmured.

"It is not much to ask of you, Dorian, and it is entirely for your own
sake that I am speaking. I think it right that you should know that the
most dreadful things are being said against you in London."

"I don't wish to know anything about them. I love scandals about other
people, but scandals about myself don't interest me. They have not got
the charm of novelty."


