The whole of Venice was in those two lines. He remembered the autumn
that he had passed there, and a wonderful love that had stirred him to
mad, delightful follies. There was romance in every place. But Venice,
like Oxford, had kept the background for romance, and, to the true
romantic, background was everything, or almost everything. Basil had
been with him part of the time, and had gone wild over Tintoret. Poor
Basil! what a horrible way for a man to die!

He sighed, and took up the volume again, and tried to forget. He read of
the swallows that fly in and out of the little café at Smyrna where the
Hadjis sit counting their amber beads and the turbaned merchants smoke
their long tasselled pipes and talk gravely to each other; he read of
the Obelisk in the Place de la Concorde that weeps tears of granite in
its lonely sunless exile, and longs to be back by the hot lotus-covered
Nile, where there are Sphinxes, and rose-red ibises, and white vultures
with gilded claws, and crocodiles, with small beryl eyes, that crawl
over the green steaming mud; he began to brood over those verses which,
drawing music from kiss-stained marble, tell of that curious statue that
Gautier compares to a contralto voice, the "_monstre charmant_" that
couches in the porphyry-room of the Louvre. But after a time the book
fell from his hand. He grew nervous, and a horrible fit of terror came
over him. What if Alan Campbell should be out of England? Days would
elapse before he could come back. Perhaps he might refuse to come. What
could he do then? Every moment was of vital importance. They had been
great friends once, five years before--almost inseparable, indeed. Then
the intimacy had come suddenly to an end. When they met in society now,
it was only Dorian Gray who smiled; Alan Campbell never did.

He was an extremely clever young man, though he had no real appreciation
of the visible arts, and whatever little sense of the beauty of poetry
he possessed he had gained entirely from Dorian. His dominant
intellectual passion was for science. At Cambridge he had spent a great
deal of his time working in the Laboratory, and had taken a good class
in the Natural Science Tripos of his year. Indeed, he was still devoted
to the study of chemistry, and had a laboratory of his own, in which he
used to shut himself up all day long, greatly to the annoyance of his
mother, who had set her heart on his standing for Parliament, and had a
vague idea that a chemist was a person who made up prescriptions. He was
an excellent musician, however, as well, and played both the violin and
the piano better than most amateurs. In fact, it was music that had
first brought him and Dorian Gray together--music and that indefinable
attraction that Dorian seemed to be able to exercise whenever he wished,
and indeed exercised often without being conscious of it. They had met
at Lady Berkshire's the night that Rubinstein played there, and after
that used to be always seen together at the Opera, and wherever good
music was going on. For eighteen months their intimacy lasted. Campbell
was always either at Selby Royal or in Grosvenor Square. To him, as to
many others, Dorian Gray was the type of everything that is wonderful
and fascinating in life. Whether or not a quarrel had taken place
between them no one ever knew. But suddenly people remarked that they
scarcely spoke when they met, and that Campbell seemed always to go away
early from any party at which Dorian Gray was present. He had changed,
too--was strangely melancholy at times, appeared almost to dislike
hearing music, and would never himself play, giving as his excuse, when
he was called upon, that he was so absorbed in science that he had no
time left in which to practise. And this was certainly true. Every day
he seemed to become more interested in biology, and his name appeared
once or twice in some of the scientific reviews, in connection with
certain curious experiments.

This was the man Dorian Gray was waiting for. Every second he kept
glancing at the clock. As the minutes went by he became horribly
agitated. At last he got up, and began to pace up and down the room,
looking like a beautiful caged thing. He took long stealthy strides. His
hands were curiously cold.

The suspense became unbearable. Time seemed to him to be crawling with
feet of lead, while he by monstrous winds was being swept towards the
jagged edge of some black cleft of precipice. He knew what was waiting
for him there; saw it indeed, and, shuddering, crushed with dank hands
his burning lids as though he would have robbed the very brain of sight,
and driven the eyeballs back into their cave. It was useless. The brain
had its own food on which it battened, and the imagination, made
grotesque by terror, twisted and distorted as a living thing by pain,
danced like some foul puppet on a stand, and grinned through moving
masks. Then, suddenly, Time stopped for him. Yes: that blind,
slow-breathing thing crawled no more, and horrible thoughts, Time being
dead, raced nimbly on in front, and dragged a hideous future from its
grave, and showed it to him. He stared at it. Its very horror made him
stone.

At last the door opened, and his servant entered. He turned glazed eyes
upon him.


