On reaching his room he entirely broke down, and became a prey to
the most violent agitation.  The vulgarity of the twins, and the
gross materialism of Mrs. Otis, were naturally extremely annoying,
but what really distressed him most was, that he had been unable to
wear the suit of mail.  He had hoped that even modern Americans
would be thrilled by the sight of a Spectre In Armour, if for no
more sensible reason, at least out of respect for their national
poet Longfellow, over whose graceful and attractive poetry he
himself had whiled away many a weary hour when the Cantervilles were
up in town.  Besides, it was his own suit.  He had worn it with
great success at the Kenilworth tournament, and had been highly
complimented on it by no less a person than the Virgin Queen
herself.  Yet when he had put it on, he had been completely
overpowered by the weight of the huge breastplate and steel casque,
and had fallen heavily on the stone pavement, barking both his knees
severely, and bruising the knuckles of his right hand.

For some days after this he was extremely ill, and hardly stirred
out of his room at all, except to keep the blood-stain in proper
repair.  However, by taking great care of himself, he recovered, and
resolved to make a third attempt to frighten the United States
Minister and his family.  He selected Friday, the 17th of August,
for his appearance, and spent most of that day in looking over his
wardrobe, ultimately deciding in favour of a large slouched hat with
a red feather, a winding-sheet frilled at the wrists and neck, and a
rusty dagger.  Towards evening a violent storm of rain came on, and
the wind was so high that all the windows and doors in the old house
shook and rattled.  In fact, it was just such weather as he loved.
His plan of action was this.  He was to make his way quietly to
Washington Otis's room, gibber at him from the foot of the bed, and
stab himself three times in the throat to the sound of slow music.
He bore Washington a special grudge, being quite aware that it was
he who was in the habit of removing the famous Canterville blood-
stain, by means of Pinkerton's Paragon Detergent.  Having reduced
the reckless and foolhardy youth to a condition of abject terror, he
was then to proceed to the room occupied by the United States
Minister and his wife, and there to place a clammy hand on Mrs.
Otis's forehead, while he hissed into her trembling husband's ear
the awful secrets of the charnel-house.  With regard to little
Virginia, he had not quite made up his mind.  She had never insulted
him in any way, and was pretty and gentle.  A few hollow groans from
the wardrobe, he thought, would be more than sufficient, or, if that
failed to wake her, he might grabble at the counterpane with palsy-
twitching fingers.  As for the twins, he was quite determined to
teach them a lesson.  The first thing to be done was, of course, to
sit upon their chests, so as to produce the stifling sensation of
nightmare.  Then, as their beds were quite close to each other, to
stand between them in the form of a green, icy-cold corpse, till
they became paralysed with fear, and finally, to throw off the
winding-sheet, and crawl round the room, with white bleached bones
and one rolling eye-ball, in the character of 'Dumb Daniel, or the
Suicide's Skeleton,' a role in which he had on more than one
occasion produced a great effect, and which he considered quite
equal to his famous part of 'Martin the Maniac, or the Masked
Mystery.'

At half-past ten he heard the family going to bed.  For some time he
was disturbed by wild shrieks of laughter from the twins, who, with
the light-hearted gaiety of schoolboys, were evidently amusing
themselves before they retired to rest, but at a quarter past eleven
all was still, and, as midnight sounded, he sallied forth.  The owl
beat against the window panes, the raven croaked from the old yew-
tree, and the wind wandered moaning round the house like a lost
soul; but the Otis family slept unconscious of their doom, and high
above the rain and storm he could hear the steady snoring of the
Minister for the United States.  He stepped stealthily out of the
wainscoting, with an evil smile on his cruel, wrinkled mouth, and
the moon hid her face in a cloud as he stole past the great oriel
window, where his own arms and those of his murdered wife were
blazoned in azure and gold.  On and on he glided, like an evil
shadow, the very darkness seeming to loathe him as he passed.  Once
he thought he heard something call, and stopped; but it was only the
baying of a dog from the Red Farm, and he went on, muttering strange
sixteenth-century curses, and ever and anon brandishing the rusty
dagger in the midnight air.  Finally he reached the corner of the
passage that led to luckless Washington's room.  For a moment he
paused there, the wind blowing his long grey locks about his head,
and twisting into grotesque and fantastic folds the nameless horror
of the dead man's shroud.  Then the clock struck the quarter, and he
felt the time was come.  He chuckled to himself, and turned the
corner; but no sooner had he done so, than, with a piteous wail of
terror, he fell back, and hid his blanched face in his long, bony
hands.  Right in front of him was standing a horrible spectre,
motionless as a carven image, and monstrous as a madman's dream!
Its head was bald and burnished; its face round, and fat, and white;
and hideous laughter seemed to have writhed its features into an
eternal grin.  From the eyes streamed rays of scarlet light, the
mouth was a wide well of fire, and a hideous garment, like to his
own, swathed with its silent snows the Titan form.  On its breast
was a placard with strange writing in antique characters, some
scroll of shame it seemed, some record of wild sins, some awful
calendar of crime, and, with its right hand, it bore aloft a
falchion of gleaming steel.


