Now, this increased sense of the absolutely satisfying value of
beautiful workmanship, this recognition of the primary importance
of the sensuous element in art, this love of art for art's sake, is
the point in which we of the younger school have made a departure
from the teaching of Mr. Ruskin,--a departure definite and
different and decisive.

Master indeed of the knowledge of all noble living and of the
wisdom of all spiritual things will he be to us ever, seeing that
it was he who by the magic of his presence and the music of his
lips taught us at Oxford that enthusiasm for beauty which is the
secret of Hellenism, and that desire for creation which is the
secret of life, and filled some of us, at least, with the lofty and
passionate ambition to go forth into far and fair lands with some
message for the nations and some mission for the world, and yet in
his art criticism, his estimate of the joyous element of art, his
whole method of approaching art, we are no longer with him; for the
keystone to his aesthetic system is ethical always.  He would judge
of a picture by the amount of noble moral ideas it expresses; but
to us the channels by which all noble work in painting can touch,
and does touch, the soul are not those of truths of life or
metaphysical truths.  To him perfection of workmanship seems but
the symbol of pride, and incompleteness of technical resource the
image of an imagination too limitless to find within the limits of
form its complete expression, or of love too simple not to stammer
in its tale.  But to us the rule of art is not the rule of morals.
In an ethical system, indeed, of any gentle mercy good intentions
will, one is fain to fancy, have their recognition; but of those
that would enter the serene House of Beauty the question that we
ask is not what they had ever meant to do, but what they have done.
Their pathetic intentions are of no value to us, but their realized
creations only.  Pour moi je prefere les poetes qui font des vers,
les medecins qui sachent guerir, les peintres qui sanchent peindre.

Nor, in looking at a work of art, should we be dreaming of what it
symbolises, but rather loving it for what it is.  Indeed, the
transcendental spirit is alien to the spirit of art.  The
metaphysical mind of Asia may create for itself the monstrous and
many-breasted idol, but to the Greek, pure artist, that work is
most instinct with spiritual life which conforms most closely to
the perfect facts of physical life also.  Nor, in its primary
aspect, has a painting, for instance, any more spiritual message or
meaning for us than a blue tile from the wall of Damascus, or a
Hitzen vase.  It is a beautifully coloured surface, nothing more,
and affects us by no suggestion stolen from philosophy, no pathos
pilfered from literature, no feeling filched from a poet, but by
its own incommunicable artistic essence--by that selection of truth
which we call style, and that relation of values which is the
draughtsmanship of painting, by the whole quality of the
workmanship, the arabesque of the design, the splendour of the
colour, for these things are enough to stir the most divine and
remote of the chords which make music in our soul, and colour,
indeed, is of itself a mystical presence on things, and tone a kind
of sentiment . . . all these poems aim, as I said, at producing a
purely artistic effect, and have the rare and exquisite quality
that belongs to work of that kind; and I feel that the entire
subordination in our aesthetic movement of all merely emotional and
intellectual motives to the vital informing poetic principle is the
surest sign of our strength.

But it is not enough that a work of art should conform to the
aesthetic demands of the age:  there should be also about it, if it
is to give us any permanent delight, the impress of a distinct
individuality.  Whatever work we have in the nineteenth century
must rest on the two poles of personality and perfection.  And so
in this little volume, by separating the earlier and more simple
work from the work that is later and stronger and possesses
increased technical power and more artistic vision, one might weave
these disconnected poems, these stray and scattered threads, into
one fiery-coloured strand of life, noting first a boy's mere
gladness of being young, with all its simple joy in field and
flower, in sunlight and in song, and then the bitterness of sudden
sorrow at the ending by Death of one of the brief and beautiful
friendships of one's youth, with all those unanswered lodgings and
questionings unsatisfied by which we vex, so uselessly, the marble
face of death; the artistic contrast between the discontented
incompleteness of the spirit and the complete perfection of the
style that expresses it forming the chief element of the aesthetic
charm of these particular poems;--and then the birth of Love, and
all the wonder and the fear and the perilous delight of one on
whose boyish brows the little wings of love have beaten for the
first time; and the love-songs, so dainty and delicate, little
swallow-flights of music, and full of such fragrance and freedom
that they might all be sung in the open air and across moving
water; and then autumn, coming with its choirless woods and odorous
decay and ruined loveliness, Love lying dead; and the sense of the
mere pity of it.


