Now here, on the other hand, is a dress which, being founded on
principles, can serve us as an excellent guide and model; it has
been drawn for me, most kindly, by Mr. Godwin from the Duke of
Newcastle's delightful book on horsemanship, a book which is one of
our best authorities on our best era of costume.  I do not of
course propose it necessarily for absolute imitation; that is not
the way in which one should regard it; it is not, I mean, a revival
of a dead costume, but a realization of living laws.  I give it as
an example of a particular application of principles which are
universally right.  This rationally dressed young man can turn his
hat brim down if it rains, and his loose trousers and boots down if
he is tired--that is, he can adapt his costume to circumstances;
then he enjoys perfect freedom, the arms and legs are not made
awkward or uncomfortable by the excessive tightness of narrow
sleeves and knee-breeches, and the hips are left quite
untrammelled, always an important point; and as regards comfort,
his jacket is not too loose for warmth, nor too close for
respiration; his neck is well protected without being strangled,
and even his ostrich feathers, if any Philistine should object to
them, are not merely dandyism, but fan him very pleasantly, I am
sure, in summer, and when the weather is bad they are no doubt left
at home, and his cloak taken out.  THE VALUE OF THE DRESS IS SIMPLY
THAT EVERY SEPARATE ARTICLE OF IT EXPRESSES A LAW.  My young man is
consequently apparelled with ideas, while Mr. Huyshe's young man is
stiffened with facts; the latter teaches one nothing; from the
former one learns everything.  I need hardly say that this dress is
good, not because it is seventeenth century, but because it is
constructed on the true principles of costume, just as a square
lintel or pointed arch is good, not because one may be Greek and
the other Gothic, but because each of them is the best method of
spanning a certain-sized opening, or resisting a certain weight.
The fact, however, that this dress was generally worn in England
two centuries and a half ago shows at least this, that the right
laws of dress have been understood and realized in our country, and
so in our country may be realized and understood again.  As regards
the absolute beauty of this dress and its meaning, I should like to
say a few words more.  Mr. Wentworth Huyshe solemnly announces that
"he and those who think with him" cannot permit this question of
beauty to be imported into the question of dress; that he and those
who think with him take "practical views on the subject," and so
on.  Well, I will not enter here into a discussion as to how far
any one who does not take beauty and the value of beauty into
account can claim to be practical at all.  The word practical is
nearly always the last refuge of the uncivilized.  Of all misused
words it is the most evilly treated.  But what I want to point out
is that beauty is essentially organic; that is, it comes, not from
without, but from within, not from any added prettiness, but from
the perfection of its own being; and that consequently, as the body
is beautiful, so all apparel that rightly clothes it must be
beautiful also in its construction and in its lines.

I have no more desire to define ugliness than I have daring to
define beauty; but still I would like to remind those who mock at
beauty as being an unpractical thing of this fact, that an ugly
thing is merely a thing that is badly made, or a thing that does
not serve it purpose; that ugliness is want of fitness; that
ugliness is failure; that ugliness is uselessness, such as ornament
in the wrong place, while beauty, as some one finely said, is the
purgation of all superfluities.  There is a divine economy about
beauty; it gives us just what is needful and no more, whereas
ugliness is always extravagant; ugliness is a spendthrift and
wastes its material; in fine, ugliness--and I would commend this
remark to Mr. Wentworth Huyshe--ugliness, as much in costume as in
anything else, is always the sign that somebody has been
unpractical.  So the costume of the future in England, if it is
founded on the true laws of freedom, comfort, and adaptability to
circumstances, cannot fail to be most beautiful also, because
beauty is the sign always of the rightness of principles, the
mystical seal that is set upon what is perfect, and upon what is
perfect only.

As for your other correspondent, the first principle of dress that
all garments should be hung from the shoulders and not from the
waist seems to me to be generally approved of, although an "Old
Sailor" declares that no sailors or athletes ever suspend their
clothes from the shoulders, but always from the hips.  My own
recollection of the river and running ground at Oxford--those two
homes of Hellenism in our little Gothic town--is that the best
runners and rowers (and my own college turned out many) wore always
a tight jersey, with short drawers attached to it, the whole
costume being woven in one piece.  As for sailors, it is true, I
admit, and the bad custom seems to involve that constant "hitching
up" of the lower garments which, however popular in transpontine
dramas, cannot, I think, but be considered an extremely awkward
habit; and as all awkwardness comes from discomfort of some kind, I
trust that this point in our sailor's dress will be looked to in
the coming reform of our navy, for, in spite of all protests, I
hope we are about to reform everything, from torpedoes to top-hats,
and from crinolettes to cruises.

Then as regards clogs, my suggestion of them seems to have aroused
a great deal of terror.  Fashion in her high-heeled boots has
screamed, and the dreadful word "anachronism" has been used.  Now,
whatever is useful cannot be an anachronism.  Such a word is
applicable only to the revival of some folly; and, besides, in the
England of our own day clogs are still worn in many of our
manufacturing towns, such as Oldham.  I fear that in Oldham they
may not be dreams of beauty; in Oldham the art of inlaying them
with ivory and with pearl may possibly be unknown; yet in Oldham
they serve their purpose.  Nor is it so long since they were worn
by the upper classes of this country generally.  Only a few days
ago I had the pleasure of talking to a lady who remembered with
affectionate regret the clogs of her girlhood; they were, according
to her, not too high nor too heavy, and were provided, besides,
with some kind of spring in the sole so as to make them the more
supple for the foot in walking.  Personally, I object to all
additional height being given to a boot or shoe; it is really
against the proper principles of dress, although, if any such
height is to be given it should be by means of two props; not one;
but what I should prefer to see is some adaptation of the divided
skirt or long and moderately loose knickerbockers.  If, however,
the divided skirt is to be of any positive value, it must give up
all idea of "being identical in appearance with an ordinary skirt";
it must diminish the moderate width of each of its divisions, and
sacrifice its foolish frills and flounces; the moment it imitates a
dress it is lost; but let it visibly announce itself as what it
actually is, and it will go far towards solving a real difficulty.
I feel sure that there will be found many graceful and charming
girls ready to adopt a costume founded on these principles, in
spite of Mr. Wentworth Huyshe's terrible threat that he will not
propose to them as long as they wear it, for all charges of a want
of womanly character in these forms of dress are really
meaningless; every right article of apparel belongs equally to both
sexes, and there is absolutely no such thing as a definitely
feminine garment.  One word of warning I should like to be allowed
to give:  The over-tunic should be made full and moderately loose;
it may, if desired, be shaped more or less to the figure, but in no
case should it be confined at the waist by any straight band or
belt; on the contrary, it should fall from the shoulder to the
knee, or below it, in fine curves and vertical lines, giving more
freedom and consequently more grace.  Few garments are so
absolutely unbecoming as a belted tunic that reaches to the knees,
a fact which I wish some of our Rosalinds would consider when they
don doublet and hose; indeed, to the disregard of this artistic
principle is due the ugliness, the want of proportion, in the
Bloomer costume, a costume which in other respects is sensible.


