A terrible danger is hanging over the Americans in London.  Their
future and their reputation this season depend entirely on the
success of Buffalo Bill and Mrs. Brown-Potter.  The former is
certain to draw; for English people are far more interested in
American barbarism than they are in American civilization.  When
they sight Sandy Hook they look to their rifles and ammunition;
and, after dining once at Delmonico's, start off for Colorado or
California, for Montana or the Yellow Stone Park.  Rocky Mountains
charm them more than riotous millionaires; they have been known to
prefer buffaloes to Boston.  Why should they not?  The cities of
America are inexpressibly tedious.  The Bostonians take their
learning too sadly; culture with them is an accomplishment rather
than an atmosphere; their "Hub," as they call it, is the paradise
of prigs.  Chicago is a sort of monster-shop, full of bustle and
bores.  Political life at Washington is like political life in a
suburban vestry.  Baltimore is amusing for a week, but Philadelphia
is dreadfully provincial; and though one can dine in New York one
could not dwell there.  Better the Far West with its grizzly bears
and its untamed cowboys, its free open-air life and its free open-
air manners, its boundless prairie and its boundless mendacity!
This is what Buffalo Bill is going to bring to London; and we have
no doubt that London will fully appreciate his show.

With regard to Mrs. Brown-Potter, as acting is no longer considered
absolutely essential for success on the English stage, there is
really no reason why the pretty bright-eyed lady who charmed us all
last June by her merry laugh and her nonchalant ways, should not--
to borrow an expression from her native language--make a big boom
and paint the town red.  We sincerely hope she will; for, on the
whole, the American invasion has done English society a great deal
of good.  American women are bright, clever, and wonderfully
cosmopolitan.  Their patriotic feelings are limited to an
admiration for Niagara and a regret for the Elevated Railway; and,
unlike the men, they never bore us with Bunkers Hill.  They take
their dresses from Paris and their manners from Piccadilly, and
wear both charmingly.  They have a quaint pertness, a delightful
conceit, a native self-assertion.  They insist on being paid
compliments and have almost succeeded in making Englishmen
eloquent.  For our aristocracy they have an ardent admiration; they
adore titles and are a permanent blow to Republican principles.  In
the art of amusing men they are adepts, both by nature and
education, and can actually tell a story without forgetting the
point--an accomplishment that is extremely rare among the women of
other countries.  It is true that they lack repose and that their
voices are somewhat harsh and strident when they land first at
Liverpool; but after a time one gets to love those pretty
whirlwinds in petticoats that sweep so recklessly through society
and are so agitating to all duchesses who have daughters.  There is
something fascinating in their funny, exaggerated gestures and
their petulant way of tossing the head.  Their eyes have no magic
nor mystery in them, but they challenge us for combat; and when we
engage we are always worsted.  Their lips seem made for laughter
and yet they never grimace.  As for their voices they soon get them
into tune.  Some of them have been known to acquire a fashionable
drawl in two seasons; and after they have been presented to Royalty
they all roll their R's as vigorously as a young equerry or an old
lady-in-waiting.  Still, they never really lose their accent; it
keeps peeping out here and there, and when they chatter together
they are like a bevy of peacocks.  Nothing is more amusing than to
watch two American girls greeting each other in a drawing-room or
in the Row.  They are like children with their shrill staccato
cries of wonder, their odd little exclamations.  Their conversation
sounds like a series of exploding crackers; they are exquisitely
incoherent and use a sort of primitive, emotional language.  After
five minutes they are left beautifully breathless and look at each
other half in amusement and half in affection.  If a stolid young
Englishman is fortunate enough to be introduced to them he is
amazed at their extraordinary vivacity, their electric quickness of
repartee, their inexhaustible store of curious catchwords.  He
never really understands them, for their thoughts flutter about
with the sweet irresponsibility of butterflies; but he is pleased
and amused and feels as if he were in an aviary.  On the whole,
American girls have a wonderful charm and, perhaps, the chief
secret of their charm is that they never talk seriously except
about amusements.  They have, however, one grave fault--their
mothers.  Dreary as were those old Pilgrim Fathers who left our
shores more than two centuries ago to found a New England beyond
the seas, the Pilgrim Mothers who have returned to us in the
nineteenth century are drearier still.

Here and there, of course, there are exceptions, but as a class
they are either dull, dowdy or dyspeptic.  It is only fair to the
rising generation of America to state that they are not to blame
for this.  Indeed, they spare no pains at all to bring up their
parents properly and to give them a suitable, if somewhat late,
education.  From its earliest years every American child spends
most of its time in correcting the faults of its father and mother;
and no one who has had the opportunity of watching an American
family on the deck of an Atlantic steamer, or in the refined
seclusion of a New York boarding-house, can fail to have been
struck by this characteristic of their civilization.  In America
the young are always ready to give to those who are older than
themselves the full benefits of their inexperience.  A boy of only
eleven or twelve years of age will firmly but kindly point out to
his father his defects of manner or temper; will never weary of
warning him against extravagance, idleness, late hours,
unpunctuality, and the other temptations to which the aged are so
particularly exposed; and sometimes, should he fancy that he is
monopolizing too much of the conversation at dinner, will remind
him, across the table, of the new child's adage, "Parents should be
seen, not heard."  Nor does any mistaken idea of kindness prevent
the little American girl from censuring her mother whenever it is
necessary.  Often, indeed, feeling that a rebuke conveyed in the
presence of others is more truly efficacious than one merely
whispered in the quiet of the nursery, she will call the attention
of perfect strangers to her mother's general untidiness, her want
of intellectual Boston conversation, immoderate love of iced water
and green corn, stinginess in the matter of candy, ignorance of the
usages of the best Baltimore Society, bodily ailments, and the
like.  In fact, it may be truly said that no American child is ever
blind to the deficiencies of its parents, no matter how much it may
love them.

