"Far away," continued the statue in a low musical voice, "far away
in a little street there is a poor house.  One of the windows is
open, and through it I can see a woman seated at a table.  Her face
is thin and worn, and she has coarse, red hands, all pricked by the
needle, for she is a seamstress.  She is embroidering passion-
flowers on a satin gown for the loveliest of the Queen's maids-of-
honour to wear at the next Court-ball.  In a bed in the corner of
the room her little boy is lying ill.  He has a fever, and is
asking for oranges.  His mother has nothing to give him but river
water, so he is crying.  Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, will you
not bring her the ruby out of my sword-hilt?  My feet are fastened
to this pedestal and I cannot move."

"I am waited for in Egypt," said the Swallow.  "My friends are
flying up and down the Nile, and talking to the large lotus-
flowers.  Soon they will go to sleep in the tomb of the great King.
The King is there himself in his painted coffin.  He is wrapped in
yellow linen, and embalmed with spices.  Round his neck is a chain
of pale green jade, and his hands are like withered leaves."

"Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow," said the Prince, "will you not
stay with me for one night, and be my messenger?  The boy is so
thirsty, and the mother so sad."

"I don't think I like boys," answered the Swallow.  "Last summer,
when I was staying on the river, there were two rude boys, the
miller's sons, who were always throwing stones at me.  They never
hit me, of course; we swallows fly far too well for that, and
besides, I come of a family famous for its agility; but still, it
was a mark of disrespect."

But the Happy Prince looked so sad that the little Swallow was
sorry.  "It is very cold here," he said; "but I will stay with you
for one night, and be your messenger."

"Thank you, little Swallow," said the Prince.

So the Swallow picked out the great ruby from the Prince's sword,
and flew away with it in his beak over the roofs of the town.

He passed by the cathedral tower, where the white marble angels
were sculptured.  He passed by the palace and heard the sound of
dancing.  A beautiful girl came out on the balcony with her lover.
"How wonderful the stars are," he said to her, "and how wonderful
is the power of love!"

"I hope my dress will be ready in time for the State-ball," she
answered; "I have ordered passion-flowers to be embroidered on it;
but the seamstresses are so lazy."

He passed over the river, and saw the lanterns hanging to the masts
of the ships.  He passed over the Ghetto, and saw the old Jews
bargaining with each other, and weighing out money in copper
scales.  At last he came to the poor house and looked in.  The boy
was tossing feverishly on his bed, and the mother had fallen
asleep, she was so tired.  In he hopped, and laid the great ruby on
the table beside the woman's thimble.  Then he flew gently round
the bed, fanning the boy's forehead with his wings.  "How cool I
feel," said the boy, "I must be getting better"; and he sank into a
delicious slumber.


