About ten minutes later, the bell rang for tea, and, as Virginia did
not come down, Mrs. Otis sent up one of the footmen to tell her.
After a little time he returned and said that he could not find Miss
Virginia anywhere.  As she was in the habit of going out to the
garden every evening to get flowers for the dinner-table, Mrs. Otis
was not at all alarmed at first, but when six o'clock struck, and
Virginia did not appear, she became really agitated, and sent the
boys out to look for her, while she herself and Mr. Otis searched
every room in the house.  At half-past six the boys came back and
said that they could find no trace of their sister anywhere.  They
were all now in the greatest state of excitement, and did not know
what to do, when Mr. Otis suddenly remembered that, some few days
before, he had given a band of gypsies permission to camp in the
park.  He accordingly at once set off for Blackfell Hollow, where he
knew they were, accompanied by his eldest son and two of the farm-
servants.  The little Duke of Cheshire, who was perfectly frantic
with anxiety, begged hard to be allowed to go too, but Mr. Otis
would not allow him, as he was afraid there might be a scuffle.  On
arriving at the spot, however, he found that the gypsies had gone,
and it was evident that their departure had been rather sudden, as
the fire was still burning, and some plates were lying on the grass.
Having sent off Washington and the two men to scour the district, he
ran home, and despatched telegrams to all the police inspectors in
the county, telling them to look out for a little girl who had been
kidnapped by tramps or gypsies.  He then ordered his horse to be
brought round, and, after insisting on his wife and the three boys
sitting down to dinner, rode off down the Ascot Road with a groom.
He had hardly, however, gone a couple of miles when he heard
somebody galloping after him, and, looking round, saw the little
Duke coming up on his pony, with his face very flushed and no hat.
'I'm awfully sorry, Mr. Otis,' gasped out the boy, 'but I can't eat
any dinner as long as Virginia is lost.  Please, don't be angry with
me; if you had let us be engaged last year, there would never have
been all this trouble.  You won't send me back, will you?  I can't
go!  I won't go!'

The Minister could not help smiling at the handsome young
scapegrace, and was a good deal touched at his devotion to Virginia,
so leaning down from his horse, he patted him kindly on the
shoulders, and said, 'Well, Cecil, if you won't go back I suppose
you must come with me, but I must get you a hat at Ascot.'

'Oh, bother my hat!  I want Virginia!' cried the little Duke,
laughing, and they galloped on to the railway station.  There Mr.
Otis inquired of the station-master if any one answering the
description of Virginia had been seen on the platform, but could get
no news of her.  The station-master, however, wired up and down the
line, and assured him that a strict watch would be kept for her,
and, after having bought a hat for the little Duke from a linen-
draper, who was just putting up his shutters, Mr. Otis rode off to
Bexley, a village about four miles away, which he was told was a
well-known haunt of the gypsies, as there was a large common next to
it.  Here they roused up the rural policeman, but could get no
information from him, and, after riding all over the common, they
turned their horses' heads homewards, and reached the Chase about
eleven o'clock, dead-tired and almost heart-broken.  They found
Washington and the twins waiting for them at the gate-house with
lanterns, as the avenue was very dark.  Not the slightest trace of
Virginia had been discovered.  The gypsies had been caught on
Brockley meadows, but she was not with them, and they had explained
their sudden departure by saying that they had mistaken the date of
Chorton Fair, and had gone off in a hurry for fear they might be
late.  Indeed, they had been quite distressed at hearing of
Virginia's disappearance, as they were very grateful to Mr. Otis for
having allowed them to camp in his park, and four of their number
had stayed behind to help in the search.  The carp-pond had been
dragged, and the whole Chase thoroughly gone over, but without any
result.  It was evident that, for that night at any rate, Virginia
was lost to them; and it was in a state of the deepest depression
that Mr Otis and the boys walked up to the house, the groom
following behind with the two horses and the pony.  In the hall they
found a group of frightened servants, and lying on a sofa in the
library was poor Mrs. Otis, almost out of her mind with terror and
anxiety, and having her forehead bathed with eau-de-cologne by the
old housekeeper.  Mr. Otis at once insisted on her having something
to eat, and ordered up supper for the whole party.  It was a
melancholy meal, as hardly any one spoke, and even the twins were
awestruck and subdued, as they were very fond of their sister.  When
they had finished, Mr. Otis, in spite of the entreaties of the
little Duke, ordered them all to bed, saying that nothing more could
be done that night, and that he would telegraph in the morning to
Scotland Yard for some detectives to be sent down immediately.  Just
as they were passing out of the dining-room, midnight began to boom
from the clock tower, and when the last stroke sounded they heard a
crash and a sudden shrill cry; a dreadful peal of thunder shook the
house, a strain of unearthly music floated through the air, a panel
at the top of the staircase flew back with a loud noise, and out on
the landing, looking very pale and white, with a little casket in
her hand, stepped Virginia.  In a moment they had all rushed up to
her.  Mrs. Otis clasped her passionately in her arms, the Duke
smothered her with violent kisses, and the twins executed a wild
war-dance round the group.

