The "Girl Graduate" must of course have precedence, not merely for
her sex but for her sanity:  her letter is extremely sensible.  She
makes two points:  that high heels are a necessity for any lady who
wishes to keep her dress clean from the Stygian mud of our streets,
and that without a tight corset the ordinary number of petticoats
and etceteras' cannot be properly or conveniently held up.  Now, it
is quite true that as long as the lower garments are suspended from
the hips a corset is an absolute necessity; the mistake lies in not
suspending all apparel from the shoulders.  In the latter case a
corset becomes useless, the body is left free and unconfined for
respiration and motion, there is more health, and consequently more
beauty.  Indeed all the most ungainly and uncomfortable articles of
dress that fashion has ever in her folly prescribed, not the tight
corset merely, but the farthingale, the vertugadin, the hoop, the
crinoline, and that modern monstrosity the so-called "dress
improver" also, all of them have owed their origin to the same
error, the error of not seeing that it is from the shoulders, and
from the shoulders only, that all garments should be hung.

And as regards high heels, I quite admit that some additional
height to the shoe or boot is necessary if long gowns are to be
worn in the street; but what I object to is that the height should
be given to the heel only, and not to the sole of the foot also.
The modern high-heeled boot is, in fact, merely the clog of the
time of Henry VI., with the front prop left out, and its inevitable
effect is to throw the body forward, to shorten the steps, and
consequently to produce that want of grace which always follows
want of freedom.

Why should clogs be despised?  Much art has been expended on clogs.
They have been made of lovely woods, and delicately inlaid with
ivory, and with mother-of-pearl.  A clog might be a dream of
beauty, and, if not too high or too heavy, most comfortable also.
But if there be any who do not like clogs, let them try some
adaptation of the trouser of the Turkish lady, which is loose round
the limb and tight at the ankle.

The "Girl Graduate," with a pathos to which I am not insensible,
entreats me not to apotheosize "that awful, befringed, beflounced,
and bekilted divided skirt."  Well, I will acknowledge that the
fringes, the flounces, and the kilting do certainly defeat the
whole object of the dress, which is that of ease and liberty; but I
regard these things as mere wicked superfluities, tragic proofs
that the divided skirt is ashamed of its own division.  The
principle of the dress is good, and, though it is not by any means
perfection, it is a step towards it.

Here I leave the "Girl Graduate," with much regret, for Mr.
Wentworth Huyshe.  Mr. Huyshe makes the old criticism that Greek
dress is unsuited to our climate, and, to me the somewhat new
assertion, that the men's dress of a hundred years ago was
preferable to that of the second part of the seventeenth century,
which I consider to have been the exquisite period of English
costume.

Now, as regards the first of these two statements, I will say, to
begin with, that the warmth of apparel does not depend really on
the number of garments worn, but on the material of which they are
made.  One of the chief faults of modern dress is that it is
composed of far too many articles of clothing, most of which are of
the wrong substance; but over a substratum of pure wool, such as is
supplied by Dr. Jaeger under the modern German system, some
modification of Greek costume is perfectly applicable to our
climate, our country and our century.  This important fact has
already been pointed out by Mr. E. W. Godwin in his excellent,
though too brief handbook on Dress, contributed to the Health
Exhibition.  I call it an important fact because it makes almost
any form of lovely costume perfectly practicable in our cold
climate.  Mr. Godwin, it is true, points out that the English
ladies of the thirteenth century abandoned after some time the
flowing garments of the early Renaissance in favour of a tighter
mode, such as Northern Europe seems to demand.  This I quite admit,
and its significance; but what I contend, and what I am sure Mr.
Godwin would agree with me in, is that the principles, the laws of
Greek dress may be perfectly realized, even in a moderately tight
gown with sleeves:  I mean the principle of suspending all apparel
from the shoulders, and of relying for beauty of effect not on the
stiff ready-made ornaments of the modern milliner--the bows where
there should be no bows, and the flounces where there should be no
flounces--but on the exquisite play of light and line that one gets
from rich and rippling folds.  I am not proposing any antiquarian
revival of an ancient costume, but trying merely to point out the
right laws of dress, laws which are dictated by art and not by
archaeology, by science and not by fashion; and just as the best
work of art in our days is that which combines classic grace with
absolute reality, so from a continuation of the Greek principles of
beauty with the German principles of health will come, I feel
certain, the costume of the future.


