I have been much interested at reading the large amount of
correspondence that has been called forth by my recent lecture on
Dress.  It shows me that the subject of dress reform is one that is
occupying many wise and charming people, who have at heart the
principles of health, freedom, and beauty in costume, and I hope
that "H. B. T." and "Materfamilias" will have all the real
influence which their letters--excellent letters both of them--
certainly deserve.

I turn first to Mr. Huyshe's second letter, and the drawing that
accompanies it; but before entering into any examination of the
theory contained in each, I think I should state at once that I
have absolutely no idea whether this gentleman wears his hair long
or short, or his cuffs back or forward, or indeed what he is like
at all.  I hope he consults his own comfort and wishes in
everything which has to do with his dress, and is allowed to enjoy
that individualism in apparel which he so eloquently claims for
himself, and so foolishly tries to deny to others; but I really
could not take Mr. Wentworth Huyshe's personal appearance as any
intellectual basis for an investigation of the principles which
should guide the costume of a nation.  I am not denying the force,
or even the popularity, of the "'Eave arf a brick" school of
criticism, but I acknowledge it does not interest me.  The gamin in
the gutter may be a necessity, but the gamin in discussion is a
nuisance.  So I will proceed at once to the real point at issue,
the value of the late eighteenth-century costume over that worn in
the second quarter of the seventeenth:  the relative merits, that
is, of the principles contained in each.  Now, as regards the
eighteenth-century costume, Mr. Wentworth Huyshe acknowledges that
he has had no practical experience of it at all; in fact he makes a
pathetic appeal to his friends to corroborate him in his assertion,
which I do not question for a moment, that he has never been
"guilty of the eccentricity" of wearing himself the dress which he
proposes for general adoption by others.  There is something so
naive and so amusing about this last passage in Mr. Huyshe's letter
that I am really in doubt whether I am not doing him a wrong in
regarding him as having any serious, or sincere, views on the
question of a possible reform in dress; still, as irrespective of
any attitude of Mr. Huyshe's in the matter, the subject is in
itself an interesting one, I think it is worth continuing,
particularly as I have myself worn this late eighteenth-century
dress many times, both in public and in private, and so may claim
to have a very positive right to speak on its comfort and
suitability.  The particular form of the dress I wore was very
similar to that given in Mr. Godwin's handbook, from a print of
Northcote's, and had a certain elegance and grace about it which
was very charming; still, I gave it up for these reasons:- After a
further consideration of the laws of dress I saw that a doublet is
a far simpler and easier garment than a coat and waistcoat, and, if
buttoned from the shoulder, far warmer also, and that tails have no
place in costume, except on some Darwinian theory of heredity; from
absolute experience in the matter I found that the excessive
tightness of knee-breeches is not really comfortable if one wears
them constantly; and, in fact, I satisfied myself that the dress is
not one founded on any real principles.  The broad-brimmed hat and
loose cloak, which, as my object was not, of course, historical
accuracy but modern ease, I had always worn with the costume in
question, I have still retained, and find them most comfortable.

Well, although Mr. Huyshe has no real experience of the dress he
proposes, he gives us a drawing of it, which he labels, somewhat
prematurely, "An ideal dress."  An ideal dress of course it is not;
"passably picturesque," he says I may possibly think it; well,
passably picturesque it may be, but not beautiful, certainly,
simply because it is not founded on right principles, or, indeed,
on any principles at all.  Picturesqueness one may get in a variety
of ways; ugly things that are strange, or unfamiliar to us, for
instance, may be picturesque, such as a late sixteenth-century
costume, or a Georgian house.  Ruins, again, may be picturesque,
but beautiful they never can be, because their lines are
meaningless.  Beauty, in fact, is to be got only from the
perfection of principles; and in "the ideal dress" of Mr. Huyshe
there are no ideas or principles at all, much less the perfection
of either.  Let us examine it, and see its faults; they are obvious
to any one who desires more than a "Fancy-dress ball" basis for
costume.  To begin with, the hat and boots are all wrong.  Whatever
one wears on the extremities, such as the feet and head, should,
for the sake of comfort, be made of a soft material, and for the
sake of freedom should take its shape from the way one chooses to
wear it, and not from any stiff, stereotyped design of hat or boot
maker.  In a hat made on right principles one should be able to
turn the brim up or down according as the day is dark or fair, dry
or wet; but the hat brim of Mr. Huyshe's drawing is perfectly
stiff, and does not give much protection to the face, or the
possibility of any at all to the back of the head or the ears, in
case of a cold east wind; whereas the bycocket, a hat made in
accordance with the right laws, can be turned down behind and at
the sides, and so give the same warmth as a hood.  The crown,
again, of Mr. Huyshe's hat is far too high; a high crown diminishes
the stature of a small person, and in the case of any one who is
tall is a great inconvenience when one is getting in and out of
hansoms and railway carriages, or passing under a street awning:
in no case is it of any value whatsoever, and being useless it is
of course against the principles of dress.


