"No," answered the Linnet, "I don't think he was distinguished at
all, except for his kind heart, and his funny round good-humoured
face.  He lived in a tiny cottage all by himself, and every day he
worked in his garden.  In all the country-side there was no garden
so lovely as his.  Sweet-william grew there, and Gilly-flowers, and
Shepherds'-purses, and Fair-maids of France.  There were damask
Roses, and yellow Roses, lilac Crocuses, and gold, purple Violets
and white.  Columbine and Ladysmock, Marjoram and Wild Basil, the
Cowslip and the Flower-de-luce, the Daffodil and the Clove-Pink
bloomed or blossomed in their proper order as the months went by,
one flower taking another flower's place, so that there were always
beautiful things to look at, and pleasant odours to smell.

"Little Hans had a great many friends, but the most devoted friend
of all was big Hugh the Miller.  Indeed, so devoted was the rich
Miller to little Hans, that be would never go by his garden without
leaning over the wall and plucking a large nosegay, or a handful of
sweet herbs, or filling his pockets with plums and cherries if it
was the fruit season.

"'Real friends should have everything in common,' the Miller used
to say, and little Hans nodded and smiled, and felt very proud of
having a friend with such noble ideas.

"Sometimes, indeed, the neighbours thought it strange that the rich
Miller never gave little Hans anything in return, though he had a
hundred sacks of flour stored away in his mill, and six milch cows,
and a large flock of woolly sheep; but Hans never troubled his head
about these things, and nothing gave him greater pleasure than to
listen to all the wonderful things the Miller used to say about the
unselfishness of true friendship.

"So little Hans worked away in his garden.  During the spring, the
summer, and the autumn he was very happy, but when the winter came,
and he had no fruit or flowers to bring to the market, he suffered
a good deal from cold and hunger, and often had to go to bed
without any supper but a few dried pears or some hard nuts.  In the
winter, also, he was extremely lonely, as the Miller never came to
see him then.

"'There is no good in my going to see little Hans as long as the
snow lasts,' the Miller used to say to his wife, 'for when people
are in trouble they should be left alone, and not be bothered by
visitors.  That at least is my idea about friendship, and I am sure
I am right.  So I shall wait till the spring comes, and then I
shall pay him a visit, and he will be able to give me a large
basket of primroses and that will make him so happy.'

"'You are certainly very thoughtful about others,' answered the
Wife, as she sat in her comfortable armchair by the big pinewood
fire; 'very thoughtful indeed.  It is quite a treat to hear you
talk about friendship.  I am sure the clergyman himself could not
say such beautiful things as you do, though he does live in a
three-storied house, and wear a gold ring on his little finger.'

"'But could we not ask little Hans up here?' said the Miller's
youngest son.  'If poor Hans is in trouble I will give him half my
porridge, and show him my white rabbits.'

"'What a silly boy you are'! cried the Miller; 'I really don't know
what is the use of sending you to school.  You seem not to learn
anything.  Why, if little Hans came up here, and saw our warm fire,
and our good supper, and our great cask of red wine, he might get
envious, and envy is a most terrible thing, and would spoil
anybody's nature.  I certainly will not allow Hans' nature to be
spoiled.  I am his best friend, and I will always watch over him,
and see that he is not led into any temptations.  Besides, if Hans
came here, he might ask me to let him have some flour on credit,
and that I could not do.  Flour is one thing, and friendship is
another, and they should not be confused.  Why, the words are spelt
differently, and mean quite different things.  Everybody can see
that.'


