Conversation, perfumed with seven cigars, at first was as fantastic as
a kid let loose, but finally it settled down upon the strategy of the
constant war waged in Paris between creditors and debtors.

Now, if you will be so good as to recall the history and antecedents of
the guests, you will know that in all Paris, you could scarcely find a
group of men with more experience in this matter; the professional
men on one hand, and the artists on the other, were something in the
position of magistrates and criminals hobnobbing together. A set of
Bixiou's drawings to illustrate life in the debtors' prison, led the
conversation to take this particular turn; and from debtors' prisons
they went to debts.

It was midnight. They had broken up into little knots round the table
and before the fire, and gave themselves up to the burlesque fun which
is only possible or comprehensible in Paris and in that particular
region which is bounded by the Faubourg Montmartre, the Rue Chaussee
d'Antin, the upper end of the Rue de Navarin and the line of the
boulevards.

In ten minutes' time they had come to an end of all the deep
reflections, all the moralizings, small and great, all the bad puns made
on a subject already exhausted by Rabelais three hundred and fifty years
ago. It was not a little to their credit that the pyrotechnic display
was cut short with a final squib from Malaga.

"It all goes to the shoemakers," she said. "I left a milliner because
she failed twice with my hats. The vixen has been here twenty-seven
times to ask for twenty francs. She did not know that we never have
twenty francs. One has a thousand francs, or one sends to one's notary
for five hundred; but twenty francs I have never had in my life. My
cook and my maid may, perhaps, have so much between them; but for my
own part, I have nothing but credit, and I should lose that if I took to
borrowing small sums. If I were to ask for twenty francs, I should have
nothing to distinguish me from my colleagues that walk the boulevard."

"Is the milliner paid?" asked La Palferine.

"Oh, come now, are you turning stupid?" said she, with a wink. "She came
this morning for the twenty-seventh time, that is how I came to mention
it."

"What did you do?" asked Desroches.

"I took pity upon her, and--ordered a little hat that I have just
invented, a quite new shape. If Mlle. Amanda succeeds with it, she will
say no more about the money, her fortune is made."

"In my opinion," put in Desroches, "the finest things that I have seen
in a duel of this kind give those who know Paris a far better picture of
the city than all the fancy portraits that they paint. Some of you think
that you know a thing or two," he continued, glancing round at Nathan,
Bixiou, La Palferine, and Lousteau, "but the king of the ground is a
certain Count, now busy ranging himself. In his time, he was supposed
to be the cleverest, adroitest, canniest, boldest, stoutest, most subtle
and experienced of all the pirates, who, equipped with fine manners,
yellow kid gloves, and cabs, have ever sailed or ever will sail upon
the stormy seas of Paris. He fears neither God nor man. He applies in
private life the principles that guide the English Cabinet. Up to the
time of his marriage, his life was one continual war, like--Lousteau's,
for instance. I was, and am still his solicitor."

"And the first letter of his name is Maxime de Trailles," said La
Palferine.

"For that matter, he has paid every one, and injured no one," continued
Desroches. "But as your friend Bixiou was saying just now, it is a
violation of the liberty of the subject to be made to pay in March when
you have no mind to pay till October. By virtue of this article of his
particular code, Maxime regarded a creditor's scheme for making him pay
at once as a swindler's trick. It was a long time since he had grasped
the significance of the bill of exchange in all its bearings, direct
and remote. A young man once, in my place, called a bill of exchange
the 'asses' bridge' in his hearing. 'No,' said he, 'it is the Bridge of
Sighs; it is the shortest way to an execution.' Indeed, his knowledge
of commercial law was so complete, that a professional could not have
taught him anything. At that time he had nothing, as you know. His
carriage and horses were jobbed; he lived in his valet's house; and, by
the way, he will be a hero to his valet to the end of the chapter, even
after the marriage that he proposes to make. He belonged to three clubs,
and dined at one of them whenever he did not dine out. As a rule, he was
to be found very seldom at his own address--"

"He once said to me," interrupted La Palferine, "'My one affectation is
the pretence that I make of living in the Rue Pigalle.'"

"Well," resumed Desroches, "he was one of the combatants; and now for
the other. You have heard more or less talk of one Claparon?"

"Had hair like this!" cried Bixiou, ruffling his locks till they stood
on end. Gifted with the same talent for mimicking absurdities which
Chopin the pianist possesses to so high a degree, he proceeded forthwith
to represent the character with startling truth.

"He rolls his head like this when he speaks; he was once a commercial
traveler; he has been all sorts of things--"

"Well, he was born to travel, for at this minute, as I speak, he is on
the sea on his way to America," said Desroches. "It is his only chance,
for in all probability he will be condemned by default as a fraudulent
bankrupt next session."

"Very much at sea!" exclaimed Malaga.

"For six or seven years this Claparon acted as man of straw, cat's paw,
and scapegoat to two friends of ours, du Tillet and Nucingen; but in
1829 his part was so well known that--"

"Our friends dropped him," put in Bixiou.

"They left him to his fate at last, and he wallowed in the mire,"
continued Desroches. "In 1833 he went into partnership with one
Cerizet--"

"What! he that promoted a joint-stock company so nicely that the Sixth
Chamber cut short his career with a couple of years in jail?" asked the
lorette.

"The same. Under the Restoration, between 1823 and 1827, Cerizet's
occupation consisted in first putting his name intrepidly to various
paragraphs, on which the public prosecutor fastened with avidity, and
subsequently marching off to prison. A man could make a name for
himself with small expense in those days. The Liberal party called their
provincial champion 'the courageous Cerizet,' and towards 1828 so much
zeal received its reward in 'general interest.'

"'General interest' is a kind of civic crown bestowed on the deserving
by the daily press. Cerizet tried to discount the 'general interest'
taken in him. He came to Paris, and, with some help from capitalists in
the Opposition, started as a broker, and conducted financial operations
to some extent, the capital being found by a man in hiding, a skilful
gambler who overreached himself, and in consequence, in July 1830, his
capital foundered in the shipwreck of the Government."

"Oh! it was he whom we used to call the System," cried Bixiou.

"Say no harm of him, poor fellow," protested Malaga. "D'Estourny was a
good sort."

"You can imagine the part that a ruined man was sure to play in 1830
when his name in politics was 'the courageous Cerizet.' He was sent off
into a very snug little sub-prefecture. Unluckily for him, it is one
thing to be in opposition--any missile is good enough to throw, so long
as the flight lasts; but quite another to be in office. Three months
later, he was obliged to send in his resignation. Had he not taken
it into his head to attempt to win popularity? Still, as he had done
nothing as yet to imperil his title of 'courageous Cerizet,' the
Government proposed by way of compensation that he should manage a
newspaper; nominally an Opposition newspaper, but Ministerialist
_in petto_. So the fall of this noble nature was really due to the
Government. To Cerizet, as manager of the paper, it was rather too
evident that he was as a bird perched on a rotten bough; and then it
was that he promoted that nice little joint-stock company, and thereby
secured a couple of years in prison; he was caught, while more ingenious
swindlers succeeded in catching the public."


