"I bring good news," he said. "I have received the governorship of
Champagne and the king's promise to be made duke and peer. Moreover,
we have inherited a princely fortune from your cousin; that cursed
Huguenot, Georges de Chaverny is killed."

The countess turned pale and dropped into a chair. She saw the secret of
the devilish smile on her husband's face.

"Monsieur," she said in a voice of emotion, "you know well that I loved
my cousin Chaverny. You will answer to God for the pain you inflict upon
me."

At these words the eye of the count glittered; his lips trembled, but
he could not utter a word, so furious was he; he flung his dagger on the
table with such violence that the metal resounded like a thunder-clap.

"Listen to me," he said in his strongest voice, "and remember my words.
I will never see or hear the little monster you hold in your arms. He
is your child, and not mine; there is nothing of me in him. Hide him, I
say, hide him from my sight, or--"

"Just God!" cried the countess, "protect us!"

"Silence!" said her husband. "If you do not wish me to throttle him, see
that I never find him in my way."

"Then," said the countess gathering strength to oppose her tyrant,
"swear to me that if you never meet him you will do nothing to injure
him. Can I trust your word as a nobleman for that?"

"What does all this mean?" said the count.

"If you will not swear, kill us now together!" cried the countess,
falling on her knees and pressing her child to her breast.

"Rise, madame. I give you my word as a man of honor to do nothing
against the life of that cursed child, provided he lives among the rocks
between the sea and the house, and never crosses my path. I will give
him that fisherman's house down there for his dwelling, and the beach
for a domain. But woe betide him if I ever find him beyond those
limits."

The countess began to weep.

"Look at him!" she said. "He is your son."

"Madame!"

At that word, the frightened mother carried away the child whose heart
was beating like that of a bird caught in its nest. Whether innocence
has a power which the hardest men cannot escape, or whether the count
regretted his violence and feared to plunge into despair a creature so
necessary to his pleasures and also to his worldly prosperity, it is
certain that his voice was as soft as it was possible to make it when
his wife returned.

"Jeanne, my dear," he said, "do not be angry with me; give me your hand.
One never knows how to trust you women. I return, bringing you fresh
honors and more wealth, and yet, tete-Dieu! you receive me like an
enemy. My new government will oblige me to make long absences until I
can exchange it for that of Lower Normandy; and I request, my dear, that
you will show me a pleasant face while I am here."

The countess understood the meaning of the words, the feigned softness
of which could no longer deceive her.

"I know my duty," she replied in a tone of sadness which the count
mistook for tenderness.

The timid creature had too much purity and dignity to try, as some
clever women would have done, to govern the count by putting calculation
into her conduct,--a sort of prostitution by which noble souls feel
degraded. Silently she turned away, to console her despair with Etienne.

"Tete-Dieu! shall I never be loved?" cried the count, seeing the tears
in his wife's eyes as she left the room.

Thus incessantly threatened, motherhood became to the poor woman a
passion which assumed the intensity that women put into their guilty
affections. By a species of occult communion, the secret of which is in
the hearts of mothers, the child comprehended the peril that threatened
him and dreaded the approach of his father. The terrible scene of which
he had been a witness remained in his memory, and affected him like an
illness; at the sound of the count's step his features contracted, and
the mother's ear was not so alert as the instinct of her child. As he
grew older this faculty created by terror increased, until, like the
savages of America, Etienne could distinguish his father's step and hear
his voice at immense distances. To witness the terror with which the
count inspired her thus shared by her child made Etienne the more
precious to the countess; their union was so strengthened that like two
flowers on one twig they bent to the same wind, and lifted their heads
with the same hope. In short, they were one life.

When the count again left home Jeanne was pregnant. This time she gave
birth in due season, and not without great suffering, to a stout boy,
who soon became the living image of his father, so that the hatred of
the count for his first-born was increased by this event. To save her
cherished child the countess agreed to all the plans which her husband
formed for the happiness and wealth of his second son, whom he named
Maximilien. Etienne was to be made a priest, in order to leave the
property and titles of the house of Herouville to his younger brother.
At that cost the poor mother believed she ensured the safety of her
hated child.

No two brothers were ever more unlike than Etienne and Maximilien. The
younger's taste was all for noise, violent exercises, and war, and
the count felt for him the same excessive love that his wife felt for
Etienne. By a tacit compact each parent took charge of the child of
their heart. The duke (for about this time Henri IV. rewarded the
services of the Seigneur d'Herouville with a dukedom), not wishing, he
said, to fatigue his wife, gave the nursing of the youngest boy to
a stout peasant-woman chosen by Beauvouloir, and announced his
determination to bring up the child in his own manner. He gave him,
as time went on, a holy horror of books and study; taught him the
mechanical knowledge required by a military career, made him a good
rider, a good shot with an arquebuse, and skilful with his dagger. When
the boy was big enough he took him to hunt, and let him acquire the
savage language, the rough manners, the bodily strength, and the
vivacity of look and speech which to his mind were the attributes of an
accomplished man. The boy became, by the time he was twelve years old,
a lion-cub ill-trained, as formidable in his way as the father himself,
having free rein to tyrannize over every one, and using the privilege.


