"'Why, she is not at all troublesome; she leaves you master of your
actions,' objected we.

"'That is true,' returned La Palferine, 'but I do not choose that
anything shall slip into my life without my consent.'

"From that day he set himself to torment Claudine. It seemed that he
held the bourgeoise, the nobody, in utter horror; nothing would satisfy
him but a woman with a title. Claudine, it was true, had made progress;
she had learned to dress as well as the best-dressed woman of the
Faubourg Saint-Germain; she had freed her bearing of the unhallowed
traces; she walked with a chastened, inimitable grace; but this was not
enough. This praise of her enabled Claudine to swallow down the rest.

"But one day La Palferine said, 'If you wish to be the mistress of one
La Palferine, poor, penniless, and without prospects as he is, you
ought at least to represent him worthily. You should have a carriage and
liveried servants and a title. Give me all the gratifications of vanity
that will never be mine in my own person. The woman whom I honor with
my regard ought never to go on foot; if she is bespattered with mud, I
suffer. That is how I am made. If she is mine, she must be admired
of all Paris. All Paris shall envy me my good fortune. If some little
whipper-snapper seeing a brilliant countess pass in her brilliant
carriage shall say to himself, "Who can call such a divinity his?" and
grow thoughtful--why, it will double my pleasure.'

"La Palferine owned to us that he flung this programme at Claudine's
head simply to rid himself of her. As a result he was stupefied with
astonishment for the first and probably the only time in his life.

"'Dear,' she said, and there was a ring in her voice that betrayed the
great agitation which shook her whole being, 'it is well. All this shall
be done, or I will die.'

"She let fall a few happy tears on his hand as she kissed it.

"'You have told me what I must do to be your mistress still,' she added;
'I am glad.'

"'And then' (La Palferine told us) 'she went out with a little
coquettish gesture like a woman that has had her way. As she stood in my
garrett doorway, tall and proud, she seemed to reach the stature of an
antique sibyl.'

"All this should sufficiently explain the manners and customs of the
Bohemia in which the young _condottiere_ is one of the most brilliant
figures," Nathan continued after a pause. "Now it so happened that I
discovered Claudine's identity, and could understand the appalling truth
of one line which you perhaps overlooked in that letter of hers. It was
on this wise."

The Marquise, too thoughtful now for laughter, bade Nathan "Go on," in
a tone that told him plainly how deeply she had been impressed by these
strange things, and even more plainly how much she was interested in La
Palferine.

"In 1829, one of the most influential, steady, and clever of dramatic
writers was du Bruel. His real name is unknown to the public, on the
play-bills he is de Cursy. Under the Restoration he had a place in the
Civil Service; and being really attached to the elder branch, he sent
in his resignation bravely in 1830, and ever since has written twice as
many plays to fill the deficit in his budget made by his noble conduct.
At that time du Bruel was forty years old; you know the story of his
life. Like many of his brethren, he bore a stage dancer an affection
hard to explain, but well known in the whole world of letters. The
woman, as you know, was Tullia, one of the _premiers sujets_ of the
Academie Royale de Musique. Tullia is merely a pseudonym like du Bruel's
name of de Cursy.

"For the ten years between 1817 and 1827 Tullia was in her glory on the
heights of the stage of the Opera. With more beauty than education, a
mediocre dancer with rather more sense than most of her class, she took
no part in the virtuous reforms which ruined the corps de ballet; she
continued the Guimard dynasty. She owed her ascendency, moreover,
to various well-known protectors, to the Duc de Rhetore (the Due de
Chaulieu's eldest son), to the influence of a famous Superintendent
of Fine Arts, and sundry diplomatists and rich foreigners. During her
apogee she had a neat little house in the Rue Chauchat, and lived as
Opera nymphs used to live in the old days. Du Bruel was smitten with
her about the time when the Duke's fancy came to an end in 1823. Being
a mere subordinate in the Civil Service, du Bruel tolerated the
Superintendent of Fine Arts, believing that he himself was really
preferred. After six years this connection was almost a marriage. Tullia
has always been very careful to say nothing of her family; we have a
vague idea that she comes from Nanterre. One of her uncles, formerly
a simple bricklayer or carpenter, is now, it is said, a very rich
contractor, thanks to her influence and generous loans. This fact leaked
out through du Bruel. He happened to say that Tullia would inherit a
fine fortune sooner or later. The contractor was a bachelor; he had a
weakness for the niece to whom he is indebted.

"'He is not clever enough to be ungrateful,' said she.

"In 1829 Tullia retired from the stage of her own accord. At the age of
thirty she saw that she was growing somewhat stouter, and she had tried
pantomime without success. Her whole art consisted in the trick of
raising her skirts, after Noblet's manner, in a pirouette which inflated
them balloon-fashion and exhibited the smallest possible quantity of
clothing to the pit. The aged Vestris had told her at the very beginning
that this _temps_, well executed by a fine woman, is worth all the art
imaginable. It is the chest-note C of dancing. For which reason, he
said, the very greatest dancers--Camargo, Guimard, and Taglioni, all of
them thin, brown, and plain--could only redeem their physical defects by
their genius. Tullia, still in the height of her glory, retired before
younger and cleverer dancers; she did wisely. She was an aristocrat; she
had scarcely stooped below the noblesse in her _liaisons_; she declined
to dip her ankles in the troubled waters of July. Insolent and beautiful
as she was, Claudine possessed handsome souvenirs, but very little ready
money; still, her jewels were magnificent, and she had as fine furniture
as any one in Paris.

"On quitting the stage when she, forgotten to-day, was yet in the height
of her fame, one thought possessed her--she meant du Bruel to marry her;
and at the time of this story, you must understand that the marriage had
taken place, but was kept a secret. How do women of her class contrive
to make a man marry them after seven or eight years of intimacy? What
springs do they touch? What machinery do they set in motion? But,
however comical such domestic dramas may be, we are not now concerned
with them. Du Bruel was secretly married; the thing was done.

"Cursy before his marriage was supposed to be a jolly companion; now
and again he stayed out all night, and to some extent led the life of
a Bohemian; he would unbend at a supper-party. He went out to all
appearance to a rehearsal at the Opera-Comique, and found himself in
some unaccountable way at Dieppe, or Baden, or Saint-Germain; he gave
dinners, led the Titanic thriftless life of artists, journalists, and
writers; levied his tribute on all the greenrooms of Paris; and, in
short, was one of us. Finot, Lousteau, du Tillet, Desroches, Bixiou,
Blondet, Couture, and des Lupeaulx tolerated him in spite of his
pedantic manner and ponderous official attitude. But once married,
Tullia made a slave of du Bruel. There was no help for it. He was in
love with Tullia, poor devil.

"'Tullia' (so he said) 'had left the stage to be his alone, to be a
good and charming wife.' And somehow Tullia managed to induce the most
Puritanical members of du Bruel's family to accept her. From the very
first, before any one suspected her motives, she assiduously visited old
Mme. de Bonfalot, who bored her horribly; she made handsome presents to
mean old Mme. de Chisse, du Bruel's great-aunt; she spent a summer
with the latter lady, and never missed a single mass. She even went to
confession, received absolution, and took the sacrament; but this, you
must remember, was in the country, and under the aunt's eyes.

"'I shall have real aunts now, do you understand?' she said to us when
she came back in the winter.

"She was so delighted with her respectability, so glad to renounce her
independence, that she found means to compass her end. She flattered the
old people. She went on foot every day to sit for a couple of hours with
Mme. du Bruel the elder while that lady was ill--a Maintenon's stratagem
which amazed du Bruel. And he admired his wife without criticism; he was
so fast in the toils already that he did not feel his bonds.

"Claudine succeeded in making him understand that only under the elastic
system of a bourgeois government, only at the bourgeois court of the
Citizen-King, could a Tullia, now metamorphosed into a Mme. du Bruel,
be accepted in the society which her good sense prevented her from
attempting to enter. Mme. de Bonfalot, Mme. de Chisse, and Mme. du
Bruel received her; she was satisfied. She took up the position of
a well-conducted, simple, and virtuous woman, and never acted out of
character. In three years' time she was introduced to the friends of
these ladies.

"'And still I cannot persuade myself that young Mme. du Bruel used to
display her ankles, and the rest, to all Paris, with the light of
a hundred gas-jets pouring upon her,' Mme. Anselme Popinot remarked
naively.

"From this point of view, July 1830 inaugurated an era not unlike the
time of the Empire, when a waiting woman was received at Court in the
person of Mme. Garat, a chief-justice's 'lady.' Tullia had completely
broken, as you may guess, with all her old associates; of her former
acquaintances, she only recognized those who could not compromise her.
At the time of her marriage she had taken a very charming little
hotel between a court and a garden, lavishing money on it with wild
extravagance and putting the best part of her furniture and du Bruel's
into it. Everything that she thought common or ordinary was sold. To
find anything comparable to her sparkling splendor, you could only look
back to the days when Sophie Arnould, a Guimard, or a Duthe, in all her
glory, squandered the fortunes of princes.

"How far did this sumptuous existence affect du Bruel? It is a delicate
question to ask, and a still more delicate one to answer. A single
incident will suffice to give you an idea of Tullia's crotchets. Her
bed-spread of Brussels lace was worth ten thousand francs. A famous
actress had another like it. As soon as Claudine heard this, she allowed
her cat, a splendid Angora, to sleep on the bed. That trait gives you
the woman. Du Bruel dared not say a word; he was ordered to spread
abroad that challenge in luxury, so that it might reach the other.
Tullia was very fond of this gift from the Duc de Rhetore; but one day,
five years after her marriage, she played with her cat to such purpose
that the coverlet--furbelows, flounces, and all--was torn to shreds,
and replaced by a sensible quilt, a quilt that was a quilt, and not a
symptom of the peculiar form of insanity which drives these women to
make up by an insensate luxury for the childish days when they lived on
raw apples, to quote the expression of a journalist. The day when the
bed-spread was torn to tatters marked a new epoch in her married life.

"Cursy was remarkable for his ferocious industry. Nobody suspects the
source to which Paris owes the patch-and-powder eighteenth century
vaudevilles that flooded the stage. Those thousand-and-one vaudevilles,
which raised such an outcry among the _feuilletonistes_, were written
at Mme. du Bruel's express desire. She insisted that her husband should
purchase the hotel on which she had spent so much, where she had housed
five hundred thousand francs' worth of furniture. Wherefore Tullia never
enters into explanations; she understands the sovereign woman's reason
to admiration.

"'People made a good deal of fun of Cursy,' said she; 'but, as a matter
of fact, he found this house in the eighteenth century rouge-box,
powder, puffs, and spangles. He would never have thought of it but for
me,' she added, burying herself in the cushions in her fireside corner.

"She delivered herself thus on her return from a first night. Du Bruel's
piece had succeeded, and she foresaw an avalanche of criticisms. Tullia
had her At Homes. Every Monday she gave a tea-party; her society was as
select as might be, and she neglected nothing that could make her house
pleasant. There was a bouillotte in one room, conversation in another,
and sometimes a concert (always short) in the large drawing-room. None
but the most eminent artists performed in the house. Tullia had so much
good sense, that she attained to the most exquisite tact, and herein, in
all probability, lay the secret of her ascendency over du Bruel; at
any rate, he loved her with the love which use and wont at length makes
indispensable to life. Every day adds another thread to the strong,
irresistible, intangible web, which enmeshes the most delicate fancies,
takes captive every most transient mood, and binding them together,
holds a man captive hand and foot, heart and head.

"Tullia knew Cursy well; she knew every weak point in his armor, knew
also how to heal his wounds.

"A passion of this kind is inscrutable for any observer, even for a man
who prides himself, as I do, on a certain expertness. It is everywhere
unfathomable; the dark depths in it are darker than in any other
mystery; the colors confused even in the highest lights.

"Cursy was an old playwright, jaded by the life of the theatrical world.
He liked comfort; he liked a luxurious, affluent, easy existence; he
enjoyed being a king in his own house; he liked to be host to a party of
men of letters in a hotel resplendent with royal luxury, with carefully
chosen works of art shining in the setting. Tullia allowed du Bruel to
enthrone himself amid the tribe; there were plenty of journalists whom
it was easy enough to catch and ensnare; and, thanks to her evening
parties and a well-timed loan here and there, Cursy was not attacked
too seriously--his plays succeeded. For these reasons he would not have
separated from Tullia for an empire. If she had been unfaithful, he
would probably have passed it over, on condition that none of his
accustomed joys should be retrenched; yet, strange to say, Tullia caused
him no twinges on this account. No fancy was laid to her charge; if
there had been any, she certainly had been very careful of appearances.


