It was very unusual to be one of that illustrious body before attaining
to the second class, for the Academicians were expected to hold public
meetings every Thursday during the holidays, and to read tales in verse
or prose, epistles, essays, tragedies, dramas--compositions far above
the intelligence of the lower classes. I long treasured the memory of
a story called the "Green Ass," which was, I think, the masterpiece of
this unknown Society. In the fourth, and an Academician! This boy of
fourteen, a poet already, the protege of Madame de Stael, a coming
genius, said Father Haugoult, was to be one of us! a wizard, a youth
capable of writing a composition or a translation while we were being
called into lessons, and of learning his lessons by reading them through
but once. Louis Lambert bewildered all our ideas. And Father Haugoult's
curiosity and impatience to see this new boy added fuel to our excited
fancy.

"If he has pigeons, he can have no pigeon-house; there is not room for
another. Well, it cannot be helped," said one boy, since famous as an
agriculturist.

"Who will sit next to him?" said another.

"Oh, I wish I might be his chum!" cried an enthusiast.

In school language, the word here rendered chum--_faisant_, or in some
schools, _copin_--expressed a fraternal sharing of the joys and evils of
your childish existence, a community of interests that was fruitful of
squabbling and making friends again, a treaty of alliance offensive and
defensive. It is strange, but never in my time did I know brothers who
were chums. If man lives by his feelings, he thinks perhaps that he will
make his life the poorer if he merges an affection of his own choosing
in a natural tie.

The impression made upon me by Father Haugoult's harangue that evening
is one of the most vivid reminiscences of my childhood; I can compare it
with nothing but my first reading of _Robinson Crusoe_. Indeed, I owe to
my recollection of these prodigious impressions an observation that
may perhaps be new as to the different sense attached to words by each
hearer. The word in itself has no final meaning; we affect a word more
than it affects us; its value is in relation to the images we have
assimilated and grouped round it; but a study of this fact would
require considerable elaboration, and lead us too far from our immediate
subject.

Not being able to sleep, I had a long discussion with my next neighbor
in the dormitory as to the remarkable being who on the morrow was to
be one of us. This neighbor, who became an officer, and is now a writer
with lofty philosophical views, Barchou de Penhoen, has not been false
to his pre-destination, nor to the hazard of fortune by which the only
two scholars of Vendome, of whose fame Vendome ever hears, were brought
together in the same classroom, on the same form, and under the same
roof. Our comrade Dufaure had not, when this book was published, made
his appearance in public life as a lawyer. The translator of Fichte, the
expositor and friend of Ballanche, was already interested, as I myself
was, in metaphysical questions; we often talked nonsense together about
God, ourselves, and nature. He at that time affected pyrrhonism. Jealous
of his place as leader, he doubted Lambert's precocious gifts; while
I, having lately read _Les Enfants celebres_, overwhelmed him with
evidence, quoting young Montcalm, Pico della Mirandola, Pascal--in
short, a score of early developed brains, anomalies that are famous in
the history of the human mind, and Lambert's predecessors.

I was at the time passionately addicted to reading. My father, who was
ambitious to see me in the Ecole Polytechnique, paid for me to have a
special course of private lessons in mathematics. My mathematical master
was the librarian of the college, and allowed me to help myself to books
without much caring what I chose to take from the library, a quiet spot
where I went to him during play-hours to have my lesson. Either he was
no great mathematician, or he was absorbed in some grand scheme, for he
very willingly left me to read when I ought to have been learning, while
he worked at I knew not what. So, by a tacit understanding between us,
I made no complaints of being taught nothing, and he said nothing of the
books I borrowed.

Carried away by this ill-timed mania, I neglected my studies to compose
poems, which certainly can have shown no great promise, to judge by
a line of too many feet which became famous among my companions--the
beginning of an epic on the Incas:

  "O Inca! O roi infortune et malheureux!"

In derision of such attempts, I was nicknamed the Poet, but mockery did
not cure me. I was always rhyming, in spite of good advice from Monsieur
Mareschal, the headmaster, who tried to cure me of an unfortunately
inveterate passion by telling me the fable of a linnet that fell out
of the nest because it tried to fly before its wings were grown. I
persisted in my reading; I became the least emulous, the idlest, the
most dreamy of all the division of "little boys," and consequently the
most frequently punished.

This autobiographical digression may give some idea of the reflections I
was led to make in anticipation of Lambert's arrival. I was then twelve
years old. I felt sympathy from the first for the boy whose temperament
had some points of likeness to my own. I was at last to have a companion
in daydreams and meditations. Though I knew not yet what glory meant, I
thought it glory to be the familiar friend of a child whose immortality
was foreseen by Madame de Stael. To me Louis Lambert was as a giant.

The looked-for morrow came at last. A minute before breakfast we
heard the steps of Monsieur Mareschal and of the new boy in the quiet
courtyard. Every head was turned at once to the door of the classroom.
Father Haugoult, who participated in our torments of curiosity, did not
sound the whistle he used to reduce our mutterings to silence and bring
us back to our tasks. We then saw this famous new boy, whom Monsieur
Mareschal was leading by the hand. The superintendent descended from his
desk, and the headmaster said to him solemnly, according to etiquette:
"Monsieur, I have brought you Monsieur Louis Lambert; will you place him
in the fourth class? He will begin work to-morrow."

Then, after speaking a few words in an undertone to the class-master, he
said:

"Where can he sit?"

It would have been unfair to displace one of us for a newcomer; so as
there was but one desk vacant, Louis Lambert came to fill it, next to
me, for I had last joined the class. Though we still had some time to
wait before lessons were over, we all stood up to look at Louis Lambert.
Monsieur Mareschal heard our mutterings, saw how eager we were, and
said, with the kindness that endeared him to us all:

"Well, well, but make no noise; do not disturb the other classes."

These words set us free to play some little time before breakfast, and
we all gathered round Lambert while Monsieur Mareschal walked up and
down the courtyard with Father Haugoult.

There were about eighty of us little demons, as bold as birds of prey.
Though we ourselves had all gone through this cruel novitiate, we showed
no mercy on a newcomer, never sparing him the mockery, the catechism,
the impertinence, which were inexhaustible on such occasions, to the
discomfiture of the neophyte, whose manners, strength, and temper were
thus tested. Lambert, whether he was stoical or dumfounded, made no
reply to any questions. One of us thereupon remarked that he was no
doubt of the school of Pythagoras, and there was a shout of laughter.
The new boy was thenceforth Pythagoras through all his life at the
college. At the same time, Lambert's piercing eye, the scorn expressed
in his face for our childishness, so far removed from the stamp of his
own nature, the easy attitude he assumed, and his evident strength in
proportion to his years, infused a certain respect into the veriest
scamps among us. For my part, I kept near him, absorbed in studying him
in silence.



Louis Lambert was slightly built, nearly five feet in height; his face
was tanned, and his hands were burnt brown by the sun, giving him an
appearance of manly vigor, which, in fact, he did not possess. Indeed,
two months after he came to the college, when studying in the classroom
had faded his vivid, so to speak, vegetable coloring, he became as pale
and white as a woman.

His head was unusually large. His hair, of a fine, bright black in
masses of curls, gave wonderful beauty to his brow, of which the
proportions were extraordinary even to us heedless boys, knowing
nothing, as may be supposed, of the auguries of phrenology, a science
still in its cradle. The distinction of this prophetic brow lay
principally in the exquisitely chiseled shape of the arches under which
his black eyes sparkled, and which had the transparency of alabaster,
the line having the unusual beauty of being perfectly level to where it
met the top of the nose. But when you saw his eyes it was difficult to
think of the rest of his face, which was indeed plain enough, for their
look was full of a wonderful variety of expression; they seemed to have
a soul in their depths. At one moment astonishingly clear and piercing,
at another full of heavenly sweetness, those eyes became dull, almost
colorless, as it seemed, when he was lost in meditation. They then
looked like a window from which the sun had suddenly vanished after
lighting it up. His strength and his voice were no less variable;
equally rigid, equally unexpected. His tone could be as sweet as that of
a woman compelled to own her love; at other times it was labored, rough,
rugged, if I may use such words in a new sense. As to his strength, he
was habitually incapable of enduring the fatigue of any game, and seemed
weakly, almost infirm. But during the early days of his school-life,
one of our little bullies having made game of this sickliness, which
rendered him unfit for the violent exercise in vogue among his fellows,
Lambert took hold with both hands of one of the class-tables, consisting
of twelve large desks, face to face and sloping from the middle; he
leaned back against the class-master's desk, steadying the table with
his feet on the cross-bar below, and said:


