The chamber was one of those which, to this day octogenarian porters
of old chateaus point out to visitors as "the state bedroom where Louis
XIII. once slept." Fine pictures, mostly brown in tone, were framed
in walnut, the delicate carvings of which were blackened by time. The
rafters of the ceiling formed compartments adorned with arabesques in
the style of the preceding century, which preserved the colors of the
chestnut wood. These decorations, severe in tone, reflected the light
so little that it was difficult to see their designs, even when the sun
shone full into that long and wide and lofty chamber. The silver lamp,
placed upon the mantel of the vast fireplace, lighted the room so feebly
that its quivering gleam could be compared only to the nebulous stars
which appear at moments through the dun gray clouds of an autumn night.
The fantastic figures crowded on the marble of the fireplace, which was
opposite to the bed, were so grotesquely hideous that she dared not fix
her eyes upon them, fearing to see them move, or to hear a startling
laugh from their gaping and twisted mouths.

At this moment a tempest was growling in the chimney, giving to every
puff of wind a lugubrious meaning,--the vast size of the flute putting
the hearth into such close communication with the skies above that the
embers upon it had a sort of respiration; they sparkled and went out at
the will of the wind. The arms of the family of Herouville, carved in
white marble with their mantle and supporters, gave the appearance of
a tomb to this species of edifice, which formed a pendant to the bed,
another erection raised to the glory of Hymen. Modern architects would
have been puzzled to decide whether the room had been built for the bed
or the bed for the room. Two cupids playing on the walnut headboard,
wreathed with garlands, might have passed for angels; and columns of
the same wood, supporting the tester were carved with mythological
allegories, the explanation of which could have been found either in the
Bible or Ovid's Metamorphoses. Take away the bed, and the same tester
would have served in a church for the canopy of the pulpit or the
seats of the wardens. The married pair mounted by three steps to this
sumptuous couch, which stood upon a platform and was hung with curtains
of green silk covered with brilliant designs called "ramages"--possibly
because the birds of gay plumage there depicted were supposed to
sing. The folds of these immense curtains were so stiff that in the
semi-darkness they might have been taken for some metal fabric. On the
green velvet hanging, adorned with gold fringes, which covered the foot
of this lordly couch the superstition of the Comtes d'Herouville had
affixed a large crucifix, on which their chaplain placed a fresh branch
of sacred box when he renewed at Easter the holy water in the basin at
the foot of the cross.

On one side of the fireplace stood a large box or wardrobe of choice
woods magnificently carved, such as brides receive even now in the
provinces on their wedding day. These old chests, now so much in request
by antiquaries, were the arsenals from which women drew the rich and
elegant treasures of their personal adornment,--laces, bodices,
high collars and ruffs, gowns of price, alms-purses, masks, gloves,
veils,--in fact all the inventions of coquetry in the sixteenth century.

On the other side, by way of symmetry, was another piece of furniture,
somewhat similar in shape, where the countess kept her books, papers,
and jewels. Antique chairs covered with damask, a large and greenish
mirror, made in Venice, and richly framed in a sort of rolling
toilet-table, completed the furnishings of the room. The floor was
covered with a Persian carpet, the richness of which proved the
gallantry of the count; on the upper step of the bed stood a little
table, on which the waiting-woman served every night in a gold or silver
cup a drink prepared with spices.

After we have gone some way in life we know the secret influence exerted
by places on the condition of the soul. Who has not had his darksome
moments, when fresh hope has come into his heart from things that
surrounded him? The fortunate, or the unfortunate man, attributes an
intelligent countenance to the things among which he lives; he listens
to them, he consults them--so naturally superstitious is he. At
this moment the countess turned her eyes upon all these articles of
furniture, as if they were living beings whose help and protection she
implored; but the answer of that sombre luxury seemed to her inexorable.

Suddenly the tempest redoubled. The poor young woman could augur nothing
favorable as she listened to the threatening heavens, the changes of
which were interpreted in those credulous days according to the ideas
or the habits of individuals. Suddenly she turned her eyes to the two
arched windows at the end of the room; but the smallness of their panes
and the multiplicity of the leaden lines did not allow her to see the
sky and judge if the world were coming to an end, as certain monks,
eager for donations, affirmed. She might easily have believed in such
predictions, for the noise of the angry sea, the waves of which beat
against the castle wall, combined with the mighty voice of the tempest,
so that even the rocks appeared to shake. Though her sufferings were now
becoming keener and less endurable, the countess dared not awaken her
husband; but she turned and examined his features, as if despair
were urging her to find a consolation there against so many sinister
forebodings.

If matters were sad around the poor young woman, that face,
notwithstanding the tranquillity of sleep, seemed sadder still. The
light from the lamp, flickering in the draught, scarcely reached beyond
the foot of the bed and illumined the count's head capriciously; so that
the fitful movements of its flash upon those features in repose produced
the effect of a struggle with angry thought. The countess was scarcely
reassured by perceiving the cause of that phenomenon. Each time that a
gust of wind projected the light upon the count's large face, casting
shadows among its bony outlines, she fancied that her husband was about
to fix upon her his two insupportably stern eyes.

Implacable as the war then going on between the Church and Calvinism,
the count's forehead was threatening even while he slept. Many furrows,
produced by the emotions of a warrior life, gave it a vague resemblance
to the vermiculated stone which we see in the buildings of that period;
his hair, like the whitish lichen of old oaks, gray before its time,
surrounded without grace a cruel brow, where religious intolerance
showed its passionate brutality. The shape of the aquiline nose, which
resembled the beak of a bird of prey, the black and crinkled lids of the
yellow eyes, the prominent bones of a hollow face, the rigidity of the
wrinkles, the disdain expressed in the lower lip, were all expressive
of ambition, despotism, and power, the more to be feared because
the narrowness of the skull betrayed an almost total absence of
intelligence, and a mere brute courage devoid of generosity. The face
was horribly disfigured by a large transversal scar which had the
appearance of a second mouth on the right cheek.

At the age of thirty-three the count, anxious to distinguish himself
in that unhappy religious war the signal for which was given on
Saint-Bartholomew's day, had been grievously wounded at the siege of
Rochelle. The misfortune of this wound increased his hatred against the
partisans of what the language of that day called "the Religion," but,
by a not unnatural turn of mind, he included in that antipathy all
handsome men. Before the catastrophe, however, he was so repulsively
ugly that no lady had ever been willing to receive him as a suitor. The
only passion of his youth was for a celebrated woman called La Belle
Romaine. The distrust resulting from this new misfortune made him
suspicious to the point of not believing himself capable of inspiring a
true passion; and his character became so savage that when he did have
some successes in gallantry he owed them to the terror inspired by
his cruelty. The left hand of this terrible Catholic, which lay on
the outside of the bed, will complete this sketch of his character.
Stretched out as if to guard the countess, as a miser guards his hoard,
that enormous hand was covered with hair so thick, it presented such
a network of veins and projecting muscles, that it gave the idea of a
branch of birch clasped with a growth of yellowing ivy.

Children looking at the count's face would have thought him an ogre,
terrible tales of whom they knew by heart. It was enough to see the
width and length of the space occupied by the count in the bed, to
imagine his gigantic proportions. When awake, his gray eyebrows hid his
eyelids in a way to heighten the light of his eye, which glittered with
the luminous ferocity of a wolf skulking on the watch in a forest. Under
his lion nose, with its flaring nostrils, a large and ill-kept moustache
(for he despised all toilet niceties) completely concealed the upper
lip. Happily for the countess, her husband's wide mouth was silent
at this moment, for the softest sounds of that harsh voice made her
tremble. Though the Comte d'Herouville was barely fifty years of age,
he appeared at first sight to be sixty, so much had the toils of war,
without injuring his robust constitution, dilapidated him physically.

The countess, who was now in her nineteenth year, made a painful
contrast to that large, repulsive figure. She was fair and slim. Her
chestnut locks, threaded with gold, played upon her neck like russet
shadows, and defined a face such as Carlo Dolce has painted for his
ivory-toned madonnas,--a face which now seemed ready to expire under
the increasing attacks of physical pain. You might have thought her the
apparition of an angel sent from heaven to soften the iron will of the
terrible count.


