"Do you ever feel," said he to me one day, "as though imagined suffering
affected you in spite of yourself? If, for instance, I think with
concentration of the effect that the blade of my penknife would have in
piercing my flesh, I feel an acute pain as if I had really cut myself;
only the blood is wanting. But the pain comes suddenly, and startles me
like a sharp noise breaking profound silence. Can an idea cause physical
pain?--What do you say to that, eh?"

When he gave utterance to such subtle reflections, we both fell
into artless meditation; we set to work to detect in ourselves the
inscrutable phenomena of the origin of thoughts, which Lambert hoped to
discover in their earliest germ, so as to describe some day the unknown
process. Then, after much discussion, often mixed up with childish
notions, a look would flash from Lambert's eager eyes; he would grasp my
hand, and a word from the depths of his soul would show the current of
his mind.

"Thinking is seeing," said he one day, carried away by some objection
raised as to the first principles of our organization. "Every human
science is based on deduction, which is a slow process of seeing by
which we work up from the effect to the cause; or, in a wider sense, all
poetry, like every work of art, proceeds from a swift vision of things."

He was a spiritualist (as opposed to materialism); but I would venture
to contradict him, using his own arguments to consider the intellect
as a purely physical phenomenon. We both were right. Perhaps the words
materialism and spiritualism express the two faces of the same fact. His
considerations on the substance of the mind led to his accepting, with
a certain pride, the life of privation to which we were condemned in
consequence of our idleness and our indifference to learning. He had a
certain consciousness of his own powers which bore him up through his
spiritual cogitations. How delightful it was to me to feel his soul
acting on my own! Many a time have we remained sitting on our form, both
buried in one book, having quite forgotten each other's existence, and
yet not apart; each conscious of the other's presence, and bathing in an
ocean of thought, like two fish swimming in the same waters.

Our life, apparently, was merely vegetating; but we lived through our
heart and brain.

Lambert's influence over my imagination left traces that still abide.
I used to listen hungrily to his tales, full of the marvels which make
men, as well as children, rapturously devour stories in which truth
assumes the most grotesque forms. His passion for mystery, and the
credulity natural to the young, often led us to discuss Heaven and Hell.
Then Louis, by expounding Swedenborg, would try to make me share in his
beliefs concerning angels. In his least logical arguments there were
still amazing observations as to the powers of man, which gave his words
that color of truth without which nothing can be done in any art. The
romantic end he foresaw as the destiny of man was calculated to flatter
the yearning which tempts blameless imaginations to give themselves up
to beliefs. Is it not during the youth of a nation that its dogmas and
idols are conceived? And are not the supernatural beings before whom the
people tremble the personification of their feelings and their magnified
desires?



All that I can now remember of the poetical conversations we held
together concerning the Swedish prophet, whose works I have since had
the curiosity to read, may be told in a few paragraphs.

In each of us there are two distinct beings. According to Swedenborg,
the angel is an individual in whom the inner being conquers the external
being. If a man desires to earn his call to be an angel, as soon as his
mind reveals to him his twofold existence, he must strive to foster the
delicate angelic essence that exists within him. If, for lack of a lucid
appreciation of his destiny, he allows bodily action to predominate,
instead of confirming his intellectual being, all his powers will be
absorbed in the use of his external senses, and the angel will slowly
perish by the materialization of both natures. In the contrary case, if
he nourishes his inner being with the aliment needful to it, the soul
triumphs over matter and strives to get free.

When they separate by the act of what we call death, the angel, strong
enough then to cast off its wrappings, survives and begins its real
life. The infinite variety which differentiates individual men can only
be explained by this twofold existence, which, again, is proved and made
intelligible by that variety.

In point of fact, the wide distance between a man whose torpid
intelligence condemns him to evident stupidity, and one who, by the
exercise of his inner life, has acquired the gift of some power, allows
us to suppose that there is as great a difference between men of genius
and other beings as there is between the blind and those who see. This
hypothesis, since it extends creation beyond all limits, gives us, as it
were, the clue to heaven. The beings who, here on earth, are apparently
mingled without distinction, are there distributed, according to their
inner perfection, in distinct spheres whose speech and manners have
nothing in common. In the invisible world, as in the real world, if some
native of the lower spheres comes, all unworthy, into a higher sphere,
not only can he never understand the customs and language there, but his
mere presence paralyzes the voice and hearts of those who dwell therein.

Dante, in his _Divine Comedy_, had perhaps some slight intuition of
those spheres which begin in the world of torment, and rise, circle on
circle, to the highest heaven. Thus Swedenborg's doctrine is the product
of a lucid spirit noting down the innumerable signs by which the angels
manifest their presence among men.

This doctrine, which I have endeavored to sum up in a more or less
consistent form, was set before me by Lambert with all the fascination
of mysticism, swathed in the wrappings of the phraseology affected by
mystical writers: an obscure language full of abstractions, and
taking such effect on the brain, that there are books by Jacob Boehm,
Swedenborg, and Madame Guyon, so strangely powerful that they give rise
to phantasies as various as the dreams of the opium-eater. Lambert told
me of mystical facts so extraordinary, he so acted on my imagination,
that he made my brain reel. Still, I loved to plunge into that realm
of mystery, invisible to the senses, in which every one likes to dwell,
whether he pictures it to himself under the indefinite ideal of the
Future, or clothes it in the more solid guise of romance. These violent
revulsions of the mind on itself gave me, without my knowing it, a
comprehension of its power, and accustomed me to the workings of the
mind.

Lambert himself explained everything by his theory of the angels. To him
pure love--love as we dream of it in youth--was the coalescence of two
angelic natures. Nothing could exceed the fervency with which he longed
to meet a woman angel. And who better than he could inspire or feel
love? If anything could give an impression of an exquisite nature,
was it not the amiability and kindliness that marked his feelings, his
words, his actions, his slightest gestures, the conjugal regard that
united us as boys, and that we expressed when we called ourselves
_chums_?

