Having set forth these principles, he proposed to class the phenomena of
human life in two series of distinct results, demanding, with the ardent
insistency of conviction, a special analysis for each. In fact, having
observed in almost every type of created thing two separate motions,
he assumed, nay, he asserted, their existence in our human nature, and
designated this vital antithesis Action and Reaction.

"A desire," he said, "is a fact completely accomplished in our will
before it is accomplished externally."

Hence the sum-total of our Volitions and our Ideas constitutes Action,
and the sum-total of our external acts he called Reaction.

When I subsequently read the observations made by Bichat on the duality
of our external senses, I was really bewildered by my recollections,
recognizing the startling coincidences between the views of that
celebrated physiologist and those of Louis Lambert. They both died
young, and they had with equal steps arrived at the same strange truths.
Nature has in every case been pleased to give a twofold purpose to the
various apparatus that constitute her creatures; and the twofold action
of the human organism, which is now ascertained beyond dispute, proves
by a mass of evidence in daily life how true were Lambert's deductions
as to Action and Reaction.

The inner Being, the Being of Action--the word he used to designate an
unknown specialization--the mysterious nexus of fibrils to which we owe
the inadequately investigated powers of thought and will--in short, the
nameless entity which sees, acts, foresees the end, and accomplishes
everything before expressing itself in any physical phenomenon--must,
in conformity with its nature, be free from the physical conditions by
which the external Being of Reaction, the visible man, is fettered in
its manifestation. From this followed a multitude of logical explanation
as to those results of our twofold nature which appear the strangest,
and a rectification of various systems in which truth and falsehood are
mingled.

Certain men, having had a glimpse of some phenomena of the natural
working of the Being of Action, were, like Swedenborg, carried away
above this world by their ardent soul, thirsting for poetry, and filled
with the Divine Spirit. Thus, in their ignorance of the causes and their
admiration of the facts, they pleased their fancy by regarding that
inner man as divine, and constructing a mystical universe. Hence we have
angels! A lovely illusion which Lambert would never abandon, cherishing
it even when the sword of his logic was cutting off their dazzling
wings.

"Heaven," he would say, "must, after all, be the survival of our
perfected faculties, and hell the void into which our unperfected
faculties are cast away."

But how, then, in the ages when the understanding had preserved the
religious and spiritualist impressions, which prevailed from the time
of Christ till that of Descartes, between faith and doubt, how could men
help accounting for the mysteries of our nature otherwise than by divine
interposition? Of whom but of God Himself could sages demand an account
of an invisible creature so actively and so reactively sensitive, gifted
with faculties so extensive, so improvable by use, and so powerful under
certain occult influences, that they could sometimes see it
annihilate, by some phenomenon of sight or movement, space in its two
manifestations--Time and Distance--of which the former is the space of
the intellect, the latter is physical space? Sometimes they found it
reconstructing the past, either by the power of retrospective vision, or
by the mystery of a palingenesis not unlike the power a man might have
of detecting in the form, integument, and embryo in a seed, the flowers
of the past, and the numberless variations of their color, scent, and
shape; and sometimes, again, it could be seen vaguely foreseeing
the future, either by its apprehension of final causes, or by some
phenomenon of physical presentiment.

Other men, less poetically religious, cold, and argumentative--quacks
perhaps, but enthusiasts in brain at least, if not in heart
--recognizing some isolated examples of such phenomena, admitted their
truth while refusing to consider them as radiating from a common centre.
Each of these was, then, bent on constructing a science out of a simple
fact. Hence arose demonology, judicial astrology, the black arts, in
short, every form of divination founded on circumstances that
were essentially transient, because they varied according to men's
temperament, and to conditions that are still completely unknown.

But from these errors of the learned, and from the ecclesiastical trials
under which fell so many martyrs to their own powers, startling evidence
was derived of the prodigious faculties at the command of the Being of
Action, which, according to Lambert, can abstract itself completely from
the Being of Reaction, bursting its envelope, and piercing walls by its
potent vision; a phenomenon known to the Hindoos, as missionaries tell
us, by the name of _Tokeiad_; or again, by another faculty, can grasp
in the brain, in spite of its closest convolutions, the ideas which are
formed or forming there, and the whole of past consciousness.

"If apparitions are not impossible," said Lambert, "they must be due
to a faculty of discerning the ideas which represent man in his purest
essence, whose life, imperishable perhaps, escapes our grosser senses,
though they may become perceptible to the inner being when it has
reached a high degree of ecstasy, or a great perfection of vision."

