"What is the trouble?" he said to the countess in a low voice, as he
placed her in a manner to receive his help.

"Do not give him the child--"

"Speak loud!" cried the count in thundering tones which prevented
Beauvouloir from hearing the last word uttered by the countess. "If
not," added the count who was careful to disguise his voice, "say your
'In manus.'"

"Complain aloud," said the leech to the lady; "cry! scream! Jarnidieu!
that man has a necklace that won't fit you any better than me. Courage,
my little lady!"

"Touch her lightly!" cried the count.

"Monsieur is jealous," said the operator in a shrill voice, fortunately
drowned by the countess's cries.

For Maitre Beauvouloir's safety Nature was merciful. It was more a
miscarriage than a regular birth, and the child was so puny that it
caused little suffering to the mother.

"Holy Virgin!" cried the bonesetter, "it isn't a miscarriage, after
all!"

The count made the floor shake as he stamped with rage. The countess
pinched Beauvouloir.

"Ah! I see!" he said to himself. "It ought to be a premature birth,
ought it?" he whispered to the countess, who replied with an affirmative
sign, as if that gesture were the only language in which to express her
thoughts.

"It is not all clear to me yet," thought the bonesetter.

Like all men in constant practice, he recognized at once a woman in her
first trouble as he called it. Though the modest inexperience of
certain gestures showed him the virgin ignorance of the countess, the
mischievous operator exclaimed:--

"Madame is delivered as if she knew all about it!"

The count then said, with a calmness more terrifying than his anger:--

"Give me the child."

"Don't give it him, for the love of God!" cried the mother, whose almost
savage cry awoke in the heart of the little man a courageous pity which
attached him, more than he knew himself, to the helpless infant rejected
by his father.

"The child is not yet born; you are counting your chicken before it is
hatched," he said, coldly, hiding the infant.

Surprised to hear no cries, he examined the child, thinking it dead. The
count, seeing the deception, sprang upon him with one bound.

"God of heaven! will you give it to me?" he cried, snatching the hapless
victim which uttered feeble cries.

"Take care; the child is deformed and almost lifeless; it is a seven
months' child," said Beauvouloir clinging to the count's arm. Then, with
a strength given to him by the excitement of his pity, he clung to the
father's fingers, whispering in a broken voice: "Spare yourself a crime,
the child cannot live."

"Wretch!" replied the count, from whose hands the bonesetter had
wrenched the child, "who told you that I wished to kill my son? Could I
not caress it?"

"Wait till he is eighteen years old to caress him in that way," replied
Beauvouloir, recovering the sense of his importance. "But," he
added, thinking of his own safety, for he had recognized the Comte
d'Herouville, who in his rage had forgotten to disguise his voice, "have
him baptized at once and do not speak of his danger to the mother, or
you will kill her."

The gesture of satisfaction which escaped the count when the child's
death was prophesied, suggested this speech to the bonesetter as the
best means of saving the child at the moment. Beauvouloir now hastened
to carry the infant back to its mother who had fainted, and he pointed
to her condition reprovingly, to warn the count of the results of his
violence. The countess had heard all; for in many of the great crises
of life the human organs acquire an otherwise unknown delicacy. But the
cries of the child, laid beside her on the bed, restored her to life
as if by magic; she fancied she heard the voices of angels, when, under
cover of the whimperings of the babe, the bonesetter said in her ear:--

"Take care of him, and he'll live a hundred years. Beauvouloir knows
what he is talking about."

A celestial sigh, a silent pressure of the hand were the reward of the
leech, who had looked to see, before yielding the frail little creature
to its mother's embrace, whether that of the father had done no harm to
its puny organization. The half-crazed motion with which the mother hid
her son beside her and the threatening glance she cast upon the count
through the eye-holes of her mask, made Beauvouloir shudder.

"She will die if she loses that child too soon," he said to the count.

During the latter part of this scene the lord of Herouville seemed to
hear and see nothing. Rigid, and as if absorbed in meditation, he stood
by the window drumming on its panes. But he turned at the last words
uttered by the bonesetter, with an almost frenzied motion, and came to
him with uplifted dagger.

"Miserable clown!" he cried, giving him the opprobrious name by which
the Royalists insulted the Leaguers. "Impudent scoundrel! your science
which makes you the accomplice of men who steal inheritances is all that
prevents me from depriving Normandy of her sorcerer."

So saying, and to Beauvouloir's great satisfaction, the count replaced
the dagger in its sheath.


