The two travellers were Frenchmen. At sight of their uniforms, blue
mixed with white and faced with red velvet, their sabres, and above
all their hats covered with a green varnished-cloth and adorned with a
tricolor plume, even the German peasants had recognized army surgeons,
a body of men of science and merit liked, for the most part, not only
in our own army but also in the countries invaded by our troops. At this
period many sons of good families taken from their medical studies
by the recent conscription law due to General Jourdan, had naturally
preferred to continue their studies on the battle-field rather than be
restricted to mere military duty, little in keeping with their early
education and their peaceful destinies. Men of science, pacific yet
useful, these young men did an actual good in the midst of so much
misery, and formed a bond of sympathy with other men of science in the
various countries through which the cruel civilization of the Republic
passed.

The two young men were each provided with a pass and a commission as
assistant-surgeon signed Coste and Bernadotte; and they were on their
way to join the demi-brigade to which they were attached. Both belonged
to moderately rich families in Beauvais, a town in which the gentle
manners and loyalty of the provinces are transmitted as a species of
birthright. Attracted to the theatre of war before the date at which
they were required to begin their functions, they had travelled by
diligence to Strasburg. Though maternal prudence had only allowed them
a slender sum of money they thought themselves rich in possessing a few
louis, an actual treasure in those days when assignats were reaching
their lowest depreciation and gold was worth far more than silver.
The two young surgeons, about twenty years of age at the most, yielded
themselves up to the poesy of their situation with all the enthusiasm
of youth. Between Strasburg and Bonn they had visited the Electorate and
the banks of the Rhine as artists, philosophers, and observers. When a
man's destiny is scientific he is, at their age, a being who is truly
many-sided. Even in making love or in travelling, an assistant-surgeon
should be gathering up the rudiments of his fortune or his coming fame.

The two young had therefore given themselves wholly to that deep
admiration which must affect all educated men on seeing the banks of the
Rhine and the scenery of Suabia between Mayenne and Cologne,--a strong,
rich, vigorously varied nature, filled with feudal memories, ever fresh
and verdant, yet retaining at all points the imprints of fire and sword.
Louis XIV. and Turenne have cauterized that beautiful land. Here and
there certain ruins bear witness to the pride or rather the foresight of
the King of Versailles, who caused to be pulled down the ancient castles
that once adorned this part of Germany. Looking at this marvellous
country, covered with forests, where the picturesque charm of the
middle ages abounds, though in ruins, we are able to conceive the German
genius, its reverie, its mysticism.

The stay of the two friends at Bonn had the double purpose of science
and pleasure. The grand hospital of the Gallo-Batavian army and of
Augereau's division was established in the very palace of the Elector.
These assistant-surgeons of recent date went there to see old comrades,
to present their letters of recommendation to their medical chiefs, and
to familiarize themselves with the first aspects of their profession.
There, as elsewhere, they got rid of a few prejudices to which we cling
so fondly in favor of the beauties of our native land. Surprised by the
aspect of the columns of marble which adorn the Electoral Palace, they
went about admiring the grandiose effects of German architecture, and
finding everywhere new treasures both modern and antique.

From time to time the highways along which the two friends rode at
leisure on their way to Andernach, led them over the crest of some
granite hill that was higher than the rest. Thence, through a clearing
of the forest or cleft in the rocky barrier, they caught sudden glimpses
of the Rhine framed in stone or festooned with vigorous vegetation. The
valleys, the forest paths, the trees exhaled that autumnal odor which
induced to reverie; the wooded summits were beginning to gild and
to take on the warm brown tones significant of age; the leaves were
falling, but the skies were still azure and the dry roads lay like
yellow lines along the landscape, just then illuminated by the oblique
rays of the setting sun. At a mile and a half from Andernach the two
friends walked their horses in silence, as if no war were devastating
this beautiful land, while they followed a path made for the goats
across the lofty walls of bluish granite between which foams the Rhine.
Presently they descended by one of the declivities of the gorge, at
the foot of which is placed the little town, seated coquettishly on the
banks of the river and offering a convenient port to mariners.

"Germany is a beautiful country!" cried one of the two young men, who
was named Prosper Magnan, at the moment when he caught sight of the
painted houses of Andernach, pressed together like eggs in a basket,
and separated only by trees, gardens, and flowers. Then he admired for
a moment the pointed roofs with their projecting eaves, the wooden
staircases, the galleries of a thousand peaceful dwellings, and the
vessels swaying to the waves in the port.

[At the moment when Monsieur Hermann uttered the name of Prosper Magnan,
my opposite neighbor seized the decanter, poured out a glass of
water, and emptied it at a draught. This movement having attracted my
attention, I thought I noticed a slight trembling of the hand and a
moisture on the brow of the capitalist.

"What is that man's name?" I asked my neighbor.

"Taillefer," she replied.

"Do you feel ill?" I said to him, observing that this strange personage
was turning pale.

"Not at all," he said with a polite gesture of thanks. "I am listening,"
he added, with a nod to the guests, who were all simultaneously looking
at him.

"I have forgotten," said Monsieur Hermann, "the name of the other young
man. But the confidences which Prosper Magnan subsequently made to me
enabled me to know that his companion was dark, rather thin, and jovial.
I will, if you please, call him Wilhelm, to give greater clearness to
the tale I am about to tell you."

The worthy German resumed his narrative after having, without the
smallest regard for romanticism and local color, baptized the young
French surgeon with a Teutonic name.]

By the time the two young men reached Andernach the night was dark.
Presuming that they would lose much time in looking for their chiefs
and obtaining from them a military billet in a town already full of
soldiers, they resolved to spend their last night of freedom at an inn
standing some two or three hundred feet from Andernach, the rich color
of which, embellished by the fires of the setting sun, they had greatly
admired from the summit of the hill above the town. Painted entirely
red, this inn produced a most piquant effect in the landscape, whether
by detaching itself from the general background of the town, or by
contrasting its scarlet sides with the verdure of the surrounding
foliage, and the gray-blue tints of the water. This house owed its name,
the Red Inn, to this external decoration, imposed upon it, no doubt
from time immemorial by the caprice of its founder. A mercantile
superstition, natural enough to the different possessors of the
building, far-famed among the sailors of the Rhine, had made them
scrupulous to preserve the title.

Hearing the sound of horses' hoofs, the master of the Red Inn came out
upon the threshold of his door.

"By heavens! gentlemen," he cried, "a little later and you'd have had to
sleep beneath the stars, like a good many more of your compatriots
who are bivouacking on the other side of Andernach. Here every room is
occupied. If you want to sleep in a good bed I have only my own room to
offer you. As for your horses I can litter them down in a corner of the
courtyard. The stable is full of people. Do these gentlemen come from
France?" he added after a slight pause.

"From Bonn," cried Prosper, "and we have eaten nothing since morning."

"Oh! as to provisions," said the innkeeper, nodding his head, "people
come to the Red Inn for their wedding feast from thirty miles round. You
shall have a princely meal, a Rhine fish! More, I need not say."

After confiding their weary steeds to the care of the landlord, who
vainly called to his hostler, the two young men entered the public room
of the inn. Thick white clouds exhaled by a numerous company of smokers
prevented them from at first recognizing the persons with whom they
were thrown; but after sitting awhile near the table, with the patience
practised by philosophical travellers who know the inutility of making
a fuss, they distinguished through the vapors of tobacco the inevitable
accessories of a German inn: the stove, the clock, the pots of beer, the
long pipes, and here and there the eccentric physiognomies of Jews,
or Germans, and the weather-beaten faces of mariners. The epaulets of
several French officers were glittering through the mist, and the clank
of spurs and sabres echoed incessantly from the brick floor. Some were
playing cards, others argued, or held their tongues and ate, drank, or
walked about. One stout little woman, wearing a black velvet cap, blue
and silver stomacher, pincushion, bunch of keys, silver buckles, braided
hair,--all distinctive signs of the mistress of a German inn (a costume
which has been so often depicted in colored prints that it is too
common to describe here),--well, this wife of the innkeeper kept the two
friends alternately patient and impatient with remarkable ability.

Little by little the noise decreased, the various travellers retired to
their rooms, the clouds of smoke dispersed. When places were set for
the two young men, and the classic carp of the Rhine appeared upon the
table, eleven o'clock was striking and the room was empty. The silence
of night enabled the young surgeons to hear vaguely the noise their
horses made in eating their provender, and the murmur of the waters of
the Rhine, together with those indefinable sounds which always enliven
an inn when filled with persons preparing to go to bed. Doors and
windows are opened and shut, voices murmur vague words, and a few
interpellations echo along the passages.

At this moment of silence and tumult the two Frenchmen and their
landlord, who was boasting of Andernach, his inn, his cookery, the Rhine
wines, the Republican army, and his wife, were all three listening
with a sort of interest to the hoarse cries of sailors in a boat which
appeared to be coming to the wharf. The innkeeper, familiar no doubt
with the guttural shouts of the boatmen, went out hastily, but presently
returned conducting a short stout man, behind whom walked two sailors
carrying a heavy valise and several packages. When these were deposited
in the room, the short man took the valise and placed it beside him as
he seated himself without ceremony at the same table as the surgeons.

"Go and sleep in your boat," he said to the boatmen, "as the inn is
full. Considering all things, that is best."

"Monsieur," said the landlord to the new-comer, "these are all the
provisions I have left," pointing to the supper served to the two
Frenchmen; "I haven't so much as another crust of bread nor a bone."

"No sauer-kraut?"

"Not enough to put in my wife's thimble! As I had the honor to tell you
just now, you can have no bed but the chair on which you are sitting,
and no other chamber than this public room."

At these words the little man cast upon the landlord, the room, and the
two Frenchmen a look in which caution and alarm were equally expressed.

["Here," said Monsieur Hermann, interrupting himself, "I ought to tell
you that we have never known the real name nor the history of this man;
his papers showed that he came from Aix-la-Chapelle; he called himself
Wahlenfer and said that he owned a rather extensive pin manufactory in
the suburbs of Neuwied. Like all the manufacturers of that region, he
wore a surtout coat of common cloth, waistcoat and breeches of dark
green velveteen, stout boots, and a broad leather belt. His face was
round, his manners frank and cordial; but during the evening he seemed
unable to disguise altogether some secret apprehension or, possibly,
some anxious care. The innkeeper's opinion has always been that
this German merchant was fleeing his country. Later I heard that his
manufactory had been burned by one of those unfortunate chances so
frequent in times of war. In spite of its anxious expression the man's
face showed great kindliness. His features were handsome; and the
whiteness of his stout throat was well set off by a black cravat, a fact
which Wilhelm showed jestingly to Prosper."


