The joyous company within heard the report of their scout, and were in a
terrible fright. Escalanta and Cariharta put on their clogs in great
haste, Gananciosa threw down her broom, and Monipodio his broken plate,
every instrument sinking at once into silence. Chiquiznaque lost his
joyous grin, and stood dumb as a fish; Repolido trembled with fear, and
Maniferro looked pale with anxiety. But these various demonstrations
were exhibited only for a moment,--in the next, all that goodly
brotherhood had disappeared. Some rushed across a kind of terrace, and
gained another court; others clambered over the roof, and so passed into
a neighbouring alley. Never did the sound of a fowling piece, or a
sudden peal of thunder, more effectually disperse a flock of careless
pigeons, than did the news of the alcalde's arrival that select company
assembled in the house of the Señor Monipodio. Rinconete and Cortadillo,
not knowing whither to flee, stood in their places waiting to see what
would be the end of that sudden storm, which finished simply enough by
the return of the sentinel, who came to say that the alcalde had passed
through the whole length of the street without seeming to have any
troublesome suspicions respecting them, or even appearing to think of
their house at all.

While Monipodio was in the act of receiving this last report, there
came to the door a gentleman in the prime of youth, and dressed in the
half-rustic manner suitable to the morning, or to one residing in the
country. Monipodio caused this person to enter the house with himself;
he then sent to look for Chiquiznaque, Repolido, and Maniferro, with
orders that they should come forth from their hiding places, but that
such others as might be with them should remain where they were.

Rinconete and Cortadillo having remained in the court, could hear all
the conversation which took place between Monipodio and the gentleman
who had just arrived, and who began by inquiring how it happened that
the job he had ordered had been so badly done. At this point of the
colloquy, Chiquiznaque appeared, and Monipodio asked him if he had
accomplished the work with which he had been entrusted--namely, the
knife-slash of fourteen stitches.[38]


"Which of them was it," inquired Chiquiznaque, "that of the merchant at
the Cross-ways?" "Exactly," replied the gentleman. "Then I'll tell you
how the matter went," responded the bravo. "Last night, as I watched
before the very door of his house, and the man appeared just before to
the ringing of the _Ave Maria_, I got near him, and took the measure of
his face with my eyes; but I perceived it was so small that it was
impossible, totally impossible, to find room in it for a cut of fourteen
stitches. So that, perceiving myself unable to fulfil my
destructions"--"Instructions you mean," said the gentleman;--"Well,
well, instructions if you will," admitted Chiquiznaque,--"seeing that I
could not find room for the number of stitches I had to make, because of
the narrowness, I say, and want of space in the visage of the merchant,
I gave the cut to a lacquey he had with him, to the end that I might not
have my journey for nothing; and certainly his allowance may pass for
one of the best quality."

"I would rather you had given the master a cut of seven stitches than
the servant one of fourteen," remarked the gentleman. "You have not
fulfilled the promise made me, but the thirty ducats which I gave you as
earnest money, will be no great loss." This said, he saluted the two
ruffians and turned to depart, but Monipodio detained him by the cloak
of mixed cloth which he wore on his shoulders, saying: "Be pleased to
stop, Señor cavalier, and fulfil your promise, since we have kept our
word with strict honour and to great advantage. Twenty ducats are still
wanting to our bargain, and your worship shall not go from this place
until you have paid them, or left us something of equal value in
pledge."

"Do you call this keeping your word," said the gentleman, "making a cut
on the servant when you should have made it on the master?"

"How well his worship understands the business," remarked Chiquiznaque.
"One can easily see that he does not remember the proverb which says:
'He who loves Beltran, loves his dog likewise.'"

"But what has this proverb to do with the matter?" inquired the
gentleman.

"Why, is it not the same thing as to say, 'He who loves Beltran ill,
loves his dog ill too?' Now the master is Beltran, whom you love ill,
and the servant is his dog; thus in giving the cut to the dog I have
given it to Beltran, and our part of the agreement is fulfilled; the
work has been properly done, and nothing remains but to pay for it on
the spot and without further delay."

"That is just what I am ready to swear to," cried Monipodio; "and you,
friend Chiquiznaque, have taken all that you have said from my mouth;
wherefore let not your worship, Señor gallant, be making difficulties
out of trifles with your friends and servants. Take my advice and pay us
what is our due. After that, if your worship would like to have another
cut given to the master, of as many stitches as the space can contain,
consider that they are already sewing up the wound."


