"I doubt it not," replied the corregidor, folding Preciosa in his arms,
"for the same sensations have passed through my heart as through yours;
and how could so many strange particulars combine together unless it
were by a miracle?"

The people of the house were now lost in wonder, going about and asking
each other, "What is all this?" but erring widely in their conjectures;
for who would have imagined that the gitanilla was the daughter of
their lord? The corregidor told his wife and daughter and the old gipsy
that he desired the matter should be kept secret until he should himself
think fit to divulge it. As for the old gipsy, he assured her that he
forgave the injury she had done him in stealing his treasure, since she
had more than made atonement by restoring it. The only thing that
grieved him was that, knowing Preciosa's quality, she should have
betrothed her to a gipsy, and worse than that, to a thief and murderer.
"Alas, señor mio," said Preciosa, "he is neither a gipsy nor a thief,
although he has killed a man, but then it was one who had wounded his
honour, and he could not do less than show who he was, and kill him."

"What! he is not a gipsy, my child?" said Doña Guiomar.

"Certainly not," said the old gitana; and she related the story of
Andrew Caballero, that he was the son of Don Francisco de Cárcamo,
knight of Santiago; that his name was Don Juan de Cárcamo, of the same
order; and that she had kept his clothes after he had changed them for
those of a gipsy. She likewise stated the agreement which Preciosa and
Don Juan had made not to marry until after two years of mutual trial;
and she put in their true light the honourable conduct of both, and the
suitable condition of Don Juan.

The parents were as much surprised at this as at the recovery of their
daughter. The corregidor sent the gitana for Don Juan's clothes, and she
came back with them accompanied by a gipsy who carried them. Previously
to her return, Preciosa's parents put a thousand questions to her, and
she replied with so much discretion and grace, that even though they had
not recognised her for their child, they must have loved her. To their
inquiry whether she had any affection for Don Juan, she replied, not
more than that to which she was bound in gratitude towards one who had
humbled himself to become a gipsy for her sake; but even this should not
extend farther than her parents desired. "Say no more, daughter
Preciosa," said her father; "(for I wish you to retain this name of
Preciosa in memory of your loss and your recovery); as your father, I
take it upon myself to establish you in a position not derogatory to
your birth."

Preciosa sighed, and her mother shrewdly suspecting that the sigh was
prompted by love for Don Juan, said to the corregidor, "Since Don Juan
is a person of such rank, and is so much attached to our daughter, I
think, señor, it would not be amiss to bestow her upon him."

"Hardly have we found her to-day," he replied, "and already would you
have us lose her? Let us enjoy her company for a while at least, for
when she marries she will be ours no longer but her husband's."

"You are right, señor," said the lady, "but give orders to bring out Don
Juan, for he is probably lying in some filthy dungeon."

"No doubt he is," said Preciosa, "for as a thief and homicide, and above
all as a gipsy, they will have given him no better lodging."

"I will go see him," said the corregidor, "as if for the purpose of
taking his confession. Meanwhile, señora, I again charge you not to let
any one know this history until I choose to divulge it, for so it
behoves my office." Then embracing Preciosa he went to the prison where
Don Juan was confined, and entered his cell, not allowing any one to
accompany him.

He found the prisoner with both legs in fetters, handcuffed, and with
the iron fork not yet removed from beneath his chin. The cell was dark,
only a scanty gleam of light passing into it from a loop-hole near the
top of the wall. "How goes it, sorry knave?" said the corregidor, as he
entered. "I would I had all the gipsies in Spain leashed here together
to finish them all at once, as Nero would have beheaded all Rome at a
single blow. Know, thou thief, who art so sensitive on the point of
honour, that I am the corregidor of this city, and come to know from
thee if thy betrothed is a gitanilla who is here with the rest of you?"

Hearing this Andrew imagined that the corregidor had surely fallen in
love with Preciosa; for jealousy is a subtle thing, and enters other
bodies without breaking or dividing them. He replied, however, "If she
has said that I am her betrothed, it is very true; and, if she has said
I am not her betrothed, she has also spoken the truth; for it is not
possible that Preciosa should utter a falsehood."

"Is she so truthful then?" said the corregidor. "It is no slight thing
to be so and be a gitana. Well, my lad, she has said that she is your
betrothed, but that she has not yet given you her hand; she knows that
you must die for your crime, and she has entreated me to marry her to
you before you die, that she may have the honour of being the widow of
so great a thief as yourself."

"Then, let your worship do as she has requested," said Andrew; "for so I
be married to her, I will go content to the other world, leaving this
one with the name of being hers."

"You must love her very much?"

"So much," replied the prisoner, "that whatever I could say of it would
be nothing to the truth. In a word, señor corregidor, let my business be
despatched. I killed the man who insulted me; I adore this young gitana;
I shall die content if I die in her grace, and God's I know will not be
wanting to us, for we have both observed honourably and strictly the
promise we made each other."

"This night then I will send for you," said the corregidor, "and you
shall marry Preciosa in my house, and to-morrow morning you shall be on
the gallows. In this way I shall have complied with the demands of
justice and with the desire of you both." Andrew thanked him; the
corregidor returned home, and told his wife what had passed between
them.


