"One cannot catch trouts dry shod," the old man replied: "all things in
this life have their perils: the acts of the thief are liable to the
galleys, whipping, and the scragging-post; but it is not because one
ship encounters a storm, or springs a leak, that others should cease to
sail the seas. It would be a fine thing if there were to be no soldiers,
because war consumes men and horses. Besides, a whipping by the hand of
justice is for us a badge of honour, which becomes us better worn on the
shoulders than on the breast. The main point is to avoid having to dance
upon nothing in our young days and for our first offences; but as for
having our shoulders dusted, or thrashing the water in a galley, we
don't mind that a nutshell. For the present, Andrew, my son, keep snug
in the nest under the shelter of our wings; in duo time, we will take
you out to fly, and that where you will not return without a prey; and
the short and the long of it is, that by and by you will lick your
fingers after every theft."

"Meanwhile," said Andrew, "as a compensation for what I might bring in
by thieving during the vacation allowed me, I will divide two hundred
gold crowns among all the members of the rancho."

The words were no sooner out of his mouth, than several gitanos caught
him up in their arms, hoisted him upon their shoulders, and bore him
along, shouting, "Long life to the great Andrew, and long life to
Preciosa his beloved!" The gitanas did the same with Preciosa, not
without exciting the envy of Christina, and the other gitanillas
present; for envy dwells alike in the tents of barbarians, the huts of
shepherds, and the palaces of princes; and to see another thrive who
seems no better than oneself is a great weariness to the spirit.

This done, they ate a hearty dinner, made an equitable division of the
gift money, repeated their praises of Andrew, and exalted Preciosa's
beauty to the skies. When night fell, they broke the mule's neck, and
buried it, so as to relieve Andrew of all fear of its leading to his
discovery; they likewise buried with it the trappings, saddle, bridle,
girths and all, after the manner of the Indians, whose chief ornaments
are laid in the grave with them.

Andrew was in no small astonishment at all he had seen and heard, and
resolved to pursue his enterprise without meddling at all with the
customs of his new companions, so far as that might be possible.
Especially he hoped to exempt himself, at the cost of his purse, from
participating with them in any acts of injustice. On the following day,
Andrew requested the gipsies to break up the camp, and remove to a
distance from Madrid; for he feared that he should be recognised if he
remained there. They told him they had already made up their minds to go
to the mountains of Toledo, and thence to scour all the surrounding
country, and lay it under contribution. Accordingly they struck their
tents, and departed, offering Andrew an ass to ride; but he chose rather
to travel on foot, and serve as attendant to Preciosa, who rode
triumphantly another ass, rejoicing in her gallant esquire; whilst he
was equally delighted at finding himself close to her whom he had made
the mistress of his freedom.

O potent force of him who is called the sweet god of bitterness--a title
given him by our idleness and weakness--how effectually dost thou
enslave us! Here was Andrew, a knight, a youth of excellent parts,
brought up at court, and maintained in affluence by his noble parents;
and yet since yesterday such a change has been wrought in him that he
has deceived his servants and friends; disappointed the hopes of his
parents; abandoned the road to Flanders, where he was to have exercised
his valour and increased the honours of his line; and he has prostrated
himself at the feet of a girl, made himself the lackey of one who,
though exquisitely beautiful, is after all a gitana! Wondrous
prerogative of beauty, which brings down the strongest will to its feet,
in spite of all its resistance!

In four days' march, the gipsies arrived at a pleasant village, within
two leagues of the great Toledo, where they pitched their camp, having
first given some articles of silver to the alcalde of the district, as a
pledge that they would steal nothing within all his bounds, nor do any
other damage that might give cause of complaint against them. This done,
all the old gitanas, some young ones, and the men, spread themselves all
over the country, to the distance of four or five leagues from the
encampment. Andrew went with them to take his first lesson in thievery;
but though they gave him many in that expedition, he did not profit by
any of them. On the contrary, as was natural in a man of gentle blood,
every theft committed by his masters wrung his very soul, and sometimes
he paid for them out of his own pocket, being moved by the tears of the
poor people who had been despoiled. The gipsies were in despair at this
behavior: it was in contravention, they said, of their statutes and
ordinances, which prohibited the admission of compassion into their
hearts; because if they had any they must cease to be thieves,--a thing
which was not to be thought of on any account. Seeing this, Andrew said
he would go thieving by himself; for he was nimble enough to run from
danger, and did not lack courage to encounter it; so that the prize or
the penalty of his thieving would be exclusively his own.

The gipsies tried to dissuade him from this good purpose, telling him
that occasions might occur in which he would have need of companions, as
well to attack as to defend; and that one person alone could not make
any great booty. But in spite of all they could say, Andrew was
determined to be a solitary robber; intending to separate from the gang,
and purchase for money something which he might say he had stolen, and
thus burden his conscience as little as possible. Proceeding in this
way, in less than a month, he brought more gain to the gang than four of
the most accomplished thieves in it. Preciosa rejoiced not a little to
see her tender lover become such a smart and handy thief; but for all
that she was sorely afraid of some mischance, and would not have seen
him in the hands of justice for all the treasures of Venice; such was
the good feeling towards him which she could not help entertaining, in
return for his many good offices and presents. After remaining about a
month in the Toledan district, where they reaped a good harvest, the
gipsies entered the wealthy region of Estramadura.


