One night, after a sultry summer's day, an old hidalgo of Toledo walked
out to take the air by the river's side, along with his wife, his little
boy, his daughter aged sixteen, and a female servant. Eleven o'clock had
struck: it was a fine clear night: they were the only persons on the
road; and they sauntered leisurely along, to avoid paying the price of
fatigue for the recreation provided for the Toledans in their valley or
on the banks of their river. Secure as he thought in the careful
administration of justice in that city, and the character of its
well-disposed inhabitants, the good hidalgo was far from thinking that
any disaster could befal his family. But as misfortunes commonly happen
when they are least looked for, so it chanced with this family, who were
that night visited, in the midst of their innocent enjoyment, by a
calamity which gave them cause to weep for many a year.

There was in that city a young cavalier, about two-and-twenty years of
age, whom wealth, high birth, a wayward disposition, inordinate
indulgence, and profligate companions impelled to do things which
disgraced his rank. This young cavalier--whose real name we shall, for
good reasons, conceal under that of Rodolfo--was abroad that night with
four of his companions, insolent young roisterers like himself, and
happened to be coming down a hill as the old hidalgo and his family were
ascending it. The two parties, the sheep and the wolves, met each other.
Rodolfo and his companions, with their faces muffled in their cloaks,
stared rudely and insolently at the mother, the daughter, and the
servant-maid. The old hidalgo indignantly remonstrated; they answered
him with mocks and jeers, and passed on. But Rodolfo had been struck by
the great beauty of Leocadia, the hidalgo's daughter, and presently he
began to entertain the idea of enjoying it at all hazards. In a moment
he communicated his thoughts to his companions, and in the next moment
they resolved to turn back and carry her off to please Rodolfo; for the
rich who are open-handed always find parasites ready to encourage their
bad propensities; and thus to conceive this wicked design, to
communicate it, approve it, resolve on ravishing Leocadia, and to carry
that design into effect was the work of a moment.

They drew their swords, hid their faces in the flaps of their cloaks,
turned back, and soon came in front of the little party, who had not yet
done giving thanks to God for their escape from those audacious men.
Rodolfo laid hold on Leocadia, caught her up in his arms, and ran off
with her, whilst she was so overcome with surprise and terror, that far
from being able to defend herself or cry out, she had not even sense or
sight left to see her ravisher, or know whither he was carrying her. Her
father shouted, her mother shrieked, her little brother cried, the
servant-maid tore her own face and hair; but the shouts and shrieks were
disregarded, the wailings moved no pity, the clawing and scratching was
of no avail; for all was lost upon the loneliness of the spot, the
silence of the night, and the cruel hearts of the ravishers. Finally,
the one party went off exulting, and the other was left in desolation
and woe.

Rodolfo arrived at his own house without any impediment, and Leocadia's
parents reached theirs heart-broken and despairing. They were afraid to
appeal for justice to the laws, lest thereby they should only publish
their daughter's disgrace; besides, though well born they were poor, and
had not the means of commanding influence and favour; and above all,
they knew not the name of their injurer, or of whom or what to complain
but their luckless stars. Meanwhile Rodolfo had Leocadia safe in his
custody, and in his own apartment. It was in a wing of his father's
house, of which he had the keys, a great imprudence on the part of any
parent. When Leocadia fainted in his arms, he had bandaged her eyes, in
order that she might not notice the streets through which she passed, or
the house into which he took her; and before she recovered her senses,
he effected his guilty purpose.

Apathy and disgust commonly follow satiated lust. Rodolfo was now
impatient to get rid of Leocadia, and made up his mind to lay her in
the street, insensible as she was. He had set to work with that
intention, when she came to herself, saying, "Where am I? Woe is me!
What darkness is this? Am I in the limbo of my innocence, or the hell of
my sins? Who touches me? Am I in bed? Mother! dear father! do you hear
me? Alas, too well I perceive that you cannot hear me, and that I am in
the hands of enemies. Well would it be for me if this darkness were to
last for ever, and my eyes were never more to see the light! Whoever
thou art," She exclaimed, suddenly seizing Rodolfo's hand, "if thy soul
is capable of pity, grant me one prayer: having deprived me of honour,
now deprive me of life. Let me not survive my disgrace! In mercy kill me
this moment! It is the only amends I ask of you for the wrong you have
done me."

Confused by the vehemence of her reproaches, Rodolfo knew not what to
say or do, and answered not a word. This silence so astonished Leocadia,
that she began to fancy she was dreaming, or haunted by a phantom; but
the hands she grasped were of flesh and blood. She remembered the
violence with which she had been torn from her parents, and she became
but too well aware of the real nature of her calamity. After a
passionate burst of tears and groans, "Inhuman youth!" she continued,
"for your deeds assure me that your years are few, I will forgive the
outrage you have done me, on the sole condition that you promise and vow
to conceal your crime in perpetual silence, as profound as this darkness
in which you have perpetrated it. This is but a small recompense for so
grievous a wrong; but it is the greatest which I can ask, or you can
grant me. I have never seen your face, nor ever desire to see it. It is
enough for me to remember the injury I have sustained, without having
before my mind's eye the image of my ravisher. My complaints shall be
addressed only to Heaven: I would not have them heard by the world,
which judges not according to the circumstances of each case, but
according to its own preconceived notions. You may wonder to hear me
speak thus, being so young. I am surprised at it myself; and I perceive
that if great sorrows are sometimes dumb, they are sometimes eloquent.
Be this as it may, grant me the favour I implore: it will cost you
little. Put me at once into the street, or at least near the great
church; for I shall know my way thence to the house of my parents. But
you must also swear not to follow me, or make any attempts to ascertain
my name or that of my family, who if they were as wealthy as they are
noble, would not have to bear patiently such insult in my person. Answer
me, and if you are afraid of being known by your voice, know, that
except my father and my confessor, I have never spoken with any man in
my life, and that I should never be able to tell who you were, though
you were to speak ever so long."


