"Possibly you will ask, my son, if so be you understand me, who made me
a theologian? And mayhap you will say to yourself, Confound the old hag!
why does not she leave off being a witch since she knows so much? Why
does not she turn to God, since she knows that he is readier to forgive
sin than to permit it? To this I reply, as though you had put the
question to me, that the habit of sinning becomes a second nature, and
that of being a witch transforms itself into flesh and blood; and amidst
all its ardour, which is great, it brings with it a chilling influence
which so overcomes the soul as to freeze and benumb its faith, whence
follows a forgetfulness of itself, and it remembers neither the terrors
with which God threatens it, nor the glories with which he allures it.
In fact, as sin is fleshly and sensual, it must exhaust and stupefy all
the feelings, and render the soul incapable of rising to embrace any
good thought, or to clasp the hand which God in his mercy continually
holds out to it. I have one of those souls I have described; I see it
clearly; but the empire of the senses enchains my will, and I have ever
been and ever shall be bad.

"But let us quit this subject, and go back to that of our unguents. They
are of so cold a nature that they take away all our senses when we
anoint ourselves with them; we remain stretched on the ground, and then
they say we experience all those things in imagination which we suppose
to occur to us in reality. Sometimes after we have anointed and changed
ourselves into fowls, foals, or deer, we go to the place where our
master awaits us. There we recover our own forms and enjoy pleasures
which I will not describe, for they are such as the memory is ashamed to
recal, and the tongue refuses to relate. The short and the long of it
is, I am a witch, and cover my many delinquencies with the cloak of
hypocrisy. It is true that if some esteem and honour me as a good woman,
there are many who bawl in my ear the name imprinted upon your mother
and me by order of an ill-tempered judge, who committed his wrath to the
hands of the hangman; and the latter, not being bribed, used his plenary
power upon our shoulders. But that is past and gone; and all things
pass, memories wear out, lives do not renew themselves, tongues grow
tired, and new events make their predecessors forgotten. I am matron of
a hospital; my behaviour is plausible in appearance; my unguents procure
me some pleasant moments, and I am not so old but that I may live
another year, my age being seventy-five. I cannot fast on account of my
years, nor pray on account of the swimming in my head, nor go on
pilgrimages for the weakness of my legs, nor give alms because I am
poor, nor think rightly because I am given to back-biting, and to be
able to backbite one must first think evil. I know for all that that God
is good and merciful, and that he knows what is in store for me, and
that is enough; so let us drop this conversation which really makes me
melancholy. Come, my son, and see me anoint myself; for there is a cure
for every sorrow; and though the pleasures which the devil affords us
are illusive and fictitious, yet they appear to us to be pleasures; and
sensual delight is much greater in imagination than in actual fruition,
though it is otherwise with true joys."

After this long harangue she got up, and taking the lamp went into
another and smaller room. I followed her, filled with a thousand
conflicting thoughts, and amazed at what I had heard and what I expected
to see. Cañizares hung the lamp against the wall, hastily stripped
herself to her shift, took a jug from a corner, put her hand into it,
and, muttering between her teeth, anointed herself from her feet to the
crown of her head. Before she had finished she said to me, that whether
her body remained senseless in that room, or whether it quitted it, I
was not to be frightened, nor fail to wait there till morning, when she
would bring me word of what was to befal me until I should be a man. I
signified my assent by drooping my head; and she finished her unction,
and stretched herself on the floor like a corpse. I put my mouth to
hers, and perceived that she did not breathe at all. One thing I must
own to you, friend Scipio, that I was terribly frightened at seeing
myself shut up in that narrow room with that figure before me, which I
will describe to you as well as I can.

She was more than six feet high, a mere skeleton covered with a black
wrinkled skin. Her dugs were like two dried and puckered ox-bladders;
her lips were blackened; her long teeth locked together; her nose was
hooked; her eyes starting from her head; her hair hung in elf-locks on
her hollow wrinkled cheeks;--in short, she was all over diabolically
hideous. I remained gazing on her for a while, and felt myself overcome
with horror as I contemplated the hideous spectacle of her body, and the
worse occupation of her soul. I wanted to bite her to see if she would
come to herself, but I could not find a spot on her whole body that did
not fill me with disgust. Nevertheless, I seized her by one heel, and
dragged her to the yard, without her ever giving any sign of feeling.
There seeing myself at large with the sky above me, my fear left me, or
at least abated, so much as to give me courage to await the result of
that wicked woman's expedition, and the news she was to bring me.
Meanwhile, I asked myself, how comes this old woman to be at once so
knowing and so wicked? How is it that she can so well distinguish
between casual and culpable evils? How is it that she understands and
speaks so much about God, and acts so much from the prompting of the
devil? How is it that she sins so much from choice, not having the
excuse of ignorance?

In these reflections I passed the night. The day dawned and found us
both in the court, she lying still insensible, and I on my haunches
beside her, attentively watching her hideous countenance. The people of
the hospital came out, and seeing this spectacle, some of them
exclaimed, "The pious Cañizares is dead! See how emaciated she is with
fasting and penance." Others felt her pulse, and finding that she was
not dead, concluded that she was in a trance of holy ecstacy; whilst
others said, "This old hag is unquestionably a witch, and is no doubt
anointed, for saints are never seen in such an indecent condition when
they are lost in religious ecstacy; and among us who know her, she has
hitherto had the reputation of a witch rather than a saint." Some
curious inquirers went so far as to stick pins in her flesh up to the
head, yet without ever awaking her. It was not till seven o'clock that
she came to herself; and then finding how she was stuck over with pins,
bitten in the heels, and her back flayed by being dragged from her room,
and seeing so many eyes intently fixed upon her, she rightly concluded
that I had been the cause of her exposure. "What, you thankless,
ignorant, malicious villain," she cried, "is this my reward for the acts
I did for your mother and those I intended to do for you?" Finding
myself in peril of my life under the talons of that ferocious harpy, I
shook her off, and seizing her by her wrinkled flank, I worried and
dragged her all about the yard, whilst she shrieked for help from the
fangs of that evil spirit. At these words, most present believed that I
must be one of those fiends who are continually at enmity with good
Christians. Some were for sprinkling me with holy water, some were for
pulling me off the old woman, but durst not; others bawled out words to
exorcise me. The witch howled, I tightened my grip with my teeth, the
confusion increased, and my master was in despair, hearing it said that
I was a fiend. A few who knew nothing of exorcisms caught up three or
four sticks and began to baste me. Not liking the joke, I let go the old
woman; in three bounds I was in the street, and in a few more I was
outside the town, pursued by a host of boys, shouting, "Out of the way!
the wise dog is gone mad." Others said "he is not mad, but he is the
devil in the form of a dog." The people of the place were confirmed in
their belief that I was a devil by the tricks they had seen me perform,
by the words spoken by the old woman when she woke out of her infernal
trance, and by the extraordinary speed with which I shot away from them,
so that I seemed to vanish from before them like a being of the other
world. In six hours I cleared twelve leagues; and arrived at a camp of
gipsies in a field near Granada. There I rested awhile, for some of the
gipsies who recognised me as the wise dog, received me with great
delight, and hid me in a cave, that I might not be found if any one came
in search of me; their intention being, as I afterwards learned, to make
money by me as my master the drummer had done. I remained twenty days
among them, during which I observed their habits and ways of life; and
these are so remarkable that I must give you an account of them.

_Scip._ Before you go any further, Berganza, we had better consider what
the witch said to you, and see if there can possibly be a grain of truth
in the great lie to which you give credit. Now, what an enormous
absurdity it would be to believe that Camacha could change human beings
into brutes, or that the sacristan served her for years under the form
of an ass. All these things, and the like, are cheats, lies, or
illusions of the devil; and if it now seems to ourselves that we have
some understanding and reason--since we speak, though we are really dogs
or bear that form--we have already said that this is a portentous and
unparalleled case; and though it is palpably before us, yet we must
suspend our belief until the event determines what it should be. Shall I
make this more plain to you? Consider upon what frivolous things Camacha
declared our restoration to depend, and that what seems a prophecy to
you is nothing but a fable, or one of those old woman's tales, such as
the headless horse, and the wand of virtues, which are told by the
fireside in the long winter nights; for were it anything else it would
already have been accomplished, unless, indeed, it is to be taken in
what I have heard called an allegorical sense: that is to say, a sense
which is not the same as that which the letter imports, but which,
though differing from it, yet resembles it. Now for your
prophecy:--"They are to recover their true forms when they shall see the
exalted quickly brought low, and the lowly exalted by a hand that is
mighty to do it." If we take this in the sense I have mentioned, it
seems to me to mean that we shall recover our forms when we shall see
those who yesterday were at the top of fortune's wheel, to-day cast down
in the mire, and held of little account by those who most esteemed them;
so, likewise, when we shall see others who, but two hours ago, seemed
sent into the world only to figure as units in the sum of its
population, and now are lifted up to the very summit of prosperity. Now,
if our return, as you say, to human form, were to depend on this, why we
have already seen it, and we see it every hour. I infer, then, that
Camacha's words are to be taken, not in an allegorical, but in a
literal, sense; but this will help us out no better, since we have many
times seen what they say, and we are still dogs, as you see. And so
Carnacha was a cheat, Cañizares an artful hag, and Montiela a fool and a
rogue--be it said without offence, if by chance she was the mother of us
both, or yours, for I won't have her for mine. Furthermore, I say that
the true meaning is a game of nine-pins, in which those that stand up
are quickly knocked down, and the fallen are set up again, and that by a
hand that is able to do it. Now think whether or not in the course of
our lives we have ever seen a game of nine-pins, or having seen it, have
therefore been changed into men.

