"Look ye, husband, it appears to me that although Costanza is named in
the verses, whence it may be supposed that they were made for her, we
ought not for that reason to set the fact down for certain, just as if
we had seen them written, for there are other Costanzas in the world
besides ours. But even supposing they were meant for her, there is not a
word in them that could do her discredit. Let us be on the watch, and
look sharply after the girl; for if he is in love with her, we may be
sure he will make more verses, and try to give them to her."

"Would it not be better to get rid of all this bother by turning him out
of doors?"

"That is for you to do if you think proper. But really, by your own
account, the lad does his work so well that it would go against one's
conscience to turn him off upon such slight grounds."

"Very well; let us be on the watch as you say, and time will tell us
what we have to do." Here the conversation ended, and the landlord
carried the book back to the place where he had found it.

Tomas returned in great anxiety to look for his book, found it, and that
it might not occasion him another fright, he immediately copied out the
verses, effaced the original, and made up his mind to hazard a
declaration to Costanza upon the first opportunity that should present
itself. Her extreme reserve, however, was such that there seemed little
likelihood of his finding such an opportunity; besides, the great
concourse of people in the house made it almost impossible that he
should have any private conversation with her,--to the despair of her
unfortunate lover. That day, however, it chanced that Costanza appeared
with one cheek muffled, and told some one who asked her the reason, that
she was suffering from a violent face ache. Tomas, whose wits were
sharpened by his passion, instantly saw how he might avail himself of
that circumstance. "Señora Costanza," he said, "I will give you a prayer
in writing, which you have only to recite once or twice, and it will
take away your pain forthwith."

"Give it me, if you please," said Costanza, "and I will recite it; for I
know how to read."

"It must be on condition, however," said Tomas, "that you do not show it
to anybody; for I value it highly, and I should not wish it to lose its
charm by being made known to many."

"I promise you that no person shall see it; but let me have it at once,
for I can hardly bear this pain."

"I will write it out from memory, and bring it you immediately."

This was the very first conversation that had ever taken place between
Tomas and Costanza during all the time he had been in the house, which
was nearly a month. Tomas withdrew, wrote out the prayer, and found
means to deliver it, unseen by any one else, into Costanza's hand; and
she, with great eagerness, and no less devotion, went with it into a
room, where she shut herself up alone. Then, opening the paper, she read
as follows:--

"Lady of my soul, I am a gentleman of Burgos; and if I survive my
father, I shall inherit a property of six thousand ducats yearly income.
Upon the fame of your beauty, which spreads far and wide, I left my
native place, changed my dress, and came in the garb in which you see
me, to serve your master. If you would consent to be mine in the way
most accordant with your virtue, put me to any proof you please, to
convince you of my truth and sincerity; and when you have fully
satisfied yourself in this respect, I will, if you consent, become your
husband, and the happiest of men. For the present, I only entreat you
not to turn such loving and guileless feelings as mine into the street;
for if your master, who has no conception of them, should come to know
my aspirations, he would condemn me to exile from your presence, and
that would be the same thing as sentencing me to death. Suffer me,
señora, to see you until you believe me, considering that he does not
deserve the rigorous punishment of being deprived of the sight of you,
whose only fault has been that he adores you. You can reply to me with
your eyes, unperceived by any of the numbers who are always gazing upon
you; for your eyes are such that their anger kills, but their compassion
gives new life."

When Tomas saw that Costanza had gone away to read his letter, he
remained with a palpitating heart, fearing and hoping either his
death-doom, or the one look that should bid him live. Presently Costanza
returned, looking so beautiful in spite of her muffling, that if any
extraneous cause could have heightened her loveliness, it might be
supposed that her surprise at finding the contents of the paper so
widely different from what she had expected, had produced that effect.
In her hand she held the paper torn into small pieces, and returning,
the fragments to Tomas, whose legs could hardly bear him up, "Brother
Tomas," she said, "this prayer of yours seems to me to savour more of
witchcraft and delusion than of piety, therefore I do not choose to put
faith in it or to use it, and I have torn it up that it may not be seen
by any one more credulous than myself. Learn other prayers, for it is
impossible that this one can ever do you any good."


