"Do not think THAT," I put in. "It was not so at all. I grant you that
my behaviour was bad--I fully confess that it was so, and make no
secret of the fact. I would even go so far as to grant you that my
behaviour might well be called stupid and indecent tomfoolery; but,
MORE than that it was not. Also, let me tell you that I am very sorry
for my conduct. Yet there is one circumstance which, in my eyes, almost
absolves me from regret in the matter. Of late--that is to say, for the
last two or three weeks--I have been feeling not at all well. That is
to say, I have been in a sick, nervous, irritable, fanciful condition,
so that I have periodically lost control over myself. For instance, on
more than one occasion I have tried to pick a quarrel even with
Monsieur le Marquise here; and, under the circumstances, he had no
choice but to answer me. In short, I have recently been showing signs
of ill-health. Whether the Baroness Burmergelm will take this
circumstance into consideration when I come to beg her pardon (for I do
intend to make her amends) I do not know; but I doubt if she will, and
the less so since, so far as I know, the circumstance is one which, of
late, has begun to be abused in the legal world, in that advocates in
criminal cases have taken to justifying their clients on the ground
that, at the moment of the crime, they (the clients) were unconscious
of what they were doing--that, in short, they were out of health. 'My
client committed the murder--that is true; but he has no recollection
of having committed it.' And doctors actually support these advocates
by affirming that there really is such a malady--that there really can
arise temporary delusions which make a man remember nothing of a given
deed, or only a half or a quarter of it! But the Baron and Baroness are
members of an older generation, as well as Prussian Junkers and
landowners. To them such a process in the medico-judicial world will be
unknown, and therefore, they are the more unlikely to accept any such
explanation. What is YOUR opinion about it, General?"

"Enough, sir!" he thundered with barely restrained fury. "Enough, I
say! Once and for all I must endeavour to rid myself of you and your
impertinence. To justify yourself in the eyes of the Baron and Baroness
will be impossible. Any intercourse with you, even though it be
confined to a begging of their pardons, they would look upon as a
degradation. I may tell you that, on learning that you formed part of,
my household, the Baron approached me in the Casino, and demanded of me
additional satisfaction. Do you understand, then, what it is that you
have entailed upon me--upon ME, my good sir? You have entailed upon me
the fact of my being forced to sue humbly to the Baron, and to give him
my word of honour that this very day you shall cease to belong to my
establishment!"

"Excuse me, General," I interrupted, "but did he make an express point
of it that I should 'cease to belong to your establishment,' as you
call it?"

"No; I, of my own initiative, thought that I ought to afford him that
satisfaction; and, with it he was satisfied. So we must part, good sir.
It is my duty to hand over to you forty gulden, three florins, as per
the accompanying statement. Here is the money, and here the account,
which you are at liberty to verify. Farewell. From henceforth we are
strangers. From you I have never had anything but trouble and
unpleasantness. I am about to call the landlord, and explain to him
that from tomorrow onwards I shall no longer be responsible for your
hotel expenses. Also I have the honour to remain your obedient servant."

I took the money and the account (which was indicted in pencil), and,
bowing low to the General, said to him very gravely:

"The matter cannot end here. I regret very much that you should have
been put to unpleasantness at the Baron's hands; but, the fault (pardon
me) is your own. How came you to answer for me to the Baron? And what
did you mean by saying that I formed part of your household? I am
merely your family tutor--not a son of yours, nor yet your ward, nor a
person of any kind for whose acts you need be responsible. I am a
judicially competent person, a man of twenty-five years of age, a
university graduate, a gentleman, and, until I met yourself, a complete
stranger to you. Only my boundless respect for your merits restrains me
from demanding satisfaction at your hands, as well as a further
explanation as to the reasons which have led you to take it upon
yourself to answer for my conduct."

So struck was he with my words that, spreading out his hands, he turned
to the Frenchman, and interpreted to him that I had challenged himself
(the General) to a duel. The Frenchman laughed aloud.

"Nor do I intend to let the Baron off," I continued calmly, but with
not a little discomfiture at De Griers' merriment. "And since you,
General, have today been so good as to listen to the Baron's
complaints, and to enter into his concerns--since you have made
yourself a participator in the affair--I have the honour to inform you
that, tomorrow morning at the latest, I shall, in my own name, demand
of the said Baron a formal explanation as to the reasons which have led
him to disregard the fact that the matter lies between him and myself
alone, and to put a slight upon me by referring it to another person,
as though I were unworthy to answer for my own conduct."

Then there happened what I had foreseen. The General on hearing of this
further intended outrage, showed the white feather.

"What?" he cried. "Do you intend to go on with this damned nonsense? Do
you not realise the harm that it is doing me? I beg of you not to laugh
at me, sir--not to laugh at me, for we have police authorities here
who, out of respect for my rank, and for that of the Baron...  In
short, sir, I swear to you that I will have you arrested, and marched
out of the place, to prevent any further brawling on your part. Do you
understand what I say?" He was almost breathless with anger, as well as
in a terrible fright.

"General," I replied with that calmness which he never could abide,
"one cannot arrest a man for brawling until he has brawled. I have not
so much as begun my explanations to the Baron, and you are altogether
ignorant as to the form and time which my intended procedure is likely
to assume. I wish but to disabuse the Baron of what is, to me, a
shameful supposition--namely, that I am under the guardianship of a
person who is qualified to exercise control over my free will. It is
vain for you to disturb and alarm yourself."

"For God's sake, Alexis Ivanovitch, do put an end to this senseless
scheme of yours!" he muttered, but with a sudden change from a
truculent tone to one of entreaty as he caught me by the hand. "Do you
know what is likely to come of it? Merely further unpleasantness. You
will agree with me, I am sure, that at present I ought to move with
especial care--yes, with very especial care. You cannot be fully aware
of how I am situated. When we leave this place I shall be ready to
receive you back into my household; but, for the time being I-- Well, I
cannot tell you all my reasons." With that he wound up in a despairing
voice: "O Alexis Ivanovitch, Alexis Ivanovitch!"

I moved towards the door--begging him to be calm, and promising that
everything should be done decently and in order; whereafter I departed.

Russians, when abroad, are over-apt to play the poltroon, to watch all
their words, and to wonder what people are thinking of their conduct,
or whether such and such a thing is 'comme il faut.' In short, they are
over-apt to cosset themselves, and to lay claim to great importance.
Always they prefer the form of behaviour which has once and for all
become accepted and established. This they will follow slavishly
whether in hotels, on promenades, at meetings, or when on a journey.
But the General had avowed to me that, over and above such
considerations as these, there were circumstances which compelled him
to "move with especial care at present", and that the fact had actually
made him poor-spirited and a coward--it had made him altogether change
his tone towards me. This fact I took into my calculations, and duly
noted it, for, of course, he MIGHT apply to the authorities tomorrow,
and it behoved me to go carefully.

Yet it was not the General but Polina that I wanted to anger. She had
treated me with such cruelty, and had got me into such a hole, that I
felt a longing to force her to beseech me to stop. Of course, my
tomfoolery might compromise her; yet certain other feelings and desires
had begun to form themselves in my brain. If I was never to rank in her
eyes as anything but a nonentity, it would not greatly matter if I
figured as a draggle-tailed cockerel, and the Baron were to give me a
good thrashing; but, the fact was that I desired to have the laugh of
them all, and to come out myself unscathed. Let people see what they
WOULD see. Let Polina, for once, have a good fright, and be forced to
whistle me to heel again. But, however much she might whistle, she
should see that I was at least no draggle-tailed cockerel!


