The young man took his valise, opened the door, jumped out and stepped
up to the postilion.

"Here's the promised ecu."

The postilion took the coin and stuck it in his eye, as a fop of our
day holds his eye-glasses. Morgan divined that this pantomime had a
significance.

"Well," he asked, "what does that mean?"

"That means," said the postilion, "that, do what I will, I can't help
seeing with the other eye."

"I understand," said the young man, laughing; "and if I close the other
eye--"

"Damn it! I shan't see anything."

"Hey! you're a rogue who'd rather be blind than see with one eye! Well,
there's no disputing tastes. Here!"

And he gave him a second crown. The postilion stuck it up to his other
eye, wheeled the carriage round and took the road back to Servas.

The Companion of Jehu waited till he vanished in the darkness. Then
putting the hollow of a key to his lips, he drew a long trembling sound
from it like a boatswain's whistle.

A similar call answered him, and immediately a horseman came out of the
woods at full gallop. As he caught sight of him Morgan put on his mask.

"In whose name have you come?" asked the rider, whose face, hidden as it
was beneath the brim of an immense hat, could not be seen.

"In the name of the prophet Elisha," replied the young man with the
mask.

"Then you are he whom I am waiting for." And he dismounted.

"Are you prophet or disciple?" asked Morgan.

"Disciple," replied the new-comer.

"Where is your master?"

"You will find him at the Chartreuse of Seillon."

"Do you know how many Companions are there this evening?"

"Twelve."

"Very good; if you meet any others send them there."

He who had called himself a disciple bowed in sign of obedience,
assisted Morgan to fasten the valise to the croup of the saddle, and
respectfully held the bit while the young man mounted. Without even
waiting to thrust his other foot into the stirrup, Morgan spurred his
horse, which tore the bit from the groom's hand and started off at a
gallop.

On the right of the road stretched the forest of Seillon, like a shadowy
sea, its sombre billows undulating and moaning in the night wind. Half
a mile beyond Sue the rider turned his horse across country toward the
forest, which, as he rode on, seemed to advance toward him. The horse,
guided by an experienced hand, plunged fearlessly into the woods. Ten
minutes later he emerged on the other side.

A gloomy mass, isolated in the middle of a plain, rose about a hundred
feet from the forest. It was a building of massive architecture, shaded
by five or six venerable trees. The horseman paused before the portal,
over which were placed three statues in a triangle of the Virgin, our
Lord, and St. John the Baptist. The statue of the Virgin was at the apex
of the triangle.

The mysterious traveller had reached his goal, for this was the
Chartreuse of Seillon. This monastery, the twenty-second of its order,
was founded in 1178. In 1672 a modern edifice had been substituted for
the old building; vestiges of its ruins can be seen to this day. These
ruins consist externally of the above-mentioned portal with the three
statues, before which our mysterious traveller halted; internally, a
small chapel, entered from the right through the portal. A peasant, his
wife and two children are now living there, and the ancient monastery
has become a farm.

The monks were expelled from their convent in 1791; in 1792 the
Chartreuse and its dependencies were offered for sale as ecclesiastical
property. The dependencies consisted first of the park, adjoining the
buildings, and the noble forest which still bears the name of Seillon.
But at Bourg, a royalist and, above all, religious town, no one dared
risk his soul by purchasing property belonging to the worthy monks whom
all revered. The result was that the convent, the park and the forest
had become, under the title of state property, the property of the
republic; that is to say, they belonged to nobody, or were at the best
neglected. The republic having, for the last seven years, other things
to think of than pointing walls, cultivating an orchard and cutting
timber.

For seven years, therefore, the Chartreuse had been completely
abandoned, and if by chance curious eyes peered through the keyhole,
they caught glimpses of grass-grown courtyards, brambles in the orchard,
and brush in the forest, which, except for one road and two or three
paths that crossed it, had become almost impenetrable. The Correrie, a
species of pavilion belonging to the monastery and distant from it about
three-quarters of a mile, was mossgrown too in the tangle of the forest,
which, profiting by its liberty, grew at its own sweet will, and had
long since encircled it in a mantle of foliage which hid it from sight.

For the rest, the strangest rumors were current about these two
buildings. They were said to be haunted by guests invisible by day,
terrifying at night. The woodsmen and the belated peasants, who went to
the forest to exercise against the Republic the rights which the town of
Bourg had enjoyed in the days of the monks, pretended that, through the
cracks of the closed blinds, they had seen flames of fire dancing along
the corridors and stairways, and had distinctly heard the noise of
chains clanking over the cloister tilings and the pavement of the
courtyards. The strong-minded denied these things; but two very opposite
classes opposed the unbelievers, confirming the rumors, attributing
these terrifying noises and nocturnal lights to two different causes
according to their beliefs. The patriots declared that they were
the ghosts of the poor monks buried alive by cloister tyranny in the
In-pace, who were now returned to earth, dragging after them their
fetters to call down the vengeance of Heaven upon their persecutors.
The royalists said that they were the imps of the devil, who, finding
an empty convent, and fearing no further danger from holy water, were
boldly holding their revels where once they had not dared show a claw.
One fact, however, left everything uncertain. Not one of the believers
or unbelievers--whether he elected for the souls of the martyred monks
or for the Witches' Sabbath of Beelzebub--had ever had the courage to
venture among the shadows, and to seek during the solemn hours of night
confirmation of the truth, in order to tell on the morrow whether the
Chartreuse were haunted, and if haunted by whom.

But doubtless these tales, whether well founded or not, had no influence
over our mysterious horseman; for although, as we have said, nine
o'clock had chimed from the steeples of Bourg, and night had fallen,
he reined in his horse in front of the great portal of the deserted
monastery, and, without dismounting, drew a pistol from his holster,
striking three measured blows with the butt on the gate, after the
manner of the Freemasons. Then he listened. For an instant he doubted if
the meeting were really there; for though he looked closely and listened
attentively, he could perceive no light, nor could he hear a sound.
Still he fancied he heard a cautious step approaching the portal from
within. He knocked a second time with the same weapon and in the same
manner.

"Who knocks?" demanded a voice.

"He who comes from Elisha," replied the traveller.

"What king do the sons of Isaac obey?"

"Jehu."

"What house are they to exterminate?"

"That of Ahab."

"Are you prophet or disciple?"

"Prophet."

"Welcome then to the House of the Lord!" said the voice.

Instantly the iron bars which secured the massive portal swung back, the
bolts grated in their sockets, half of the gate opened silently, and the
horse and his rider passed beneath the sombre vault, which immediately
closed behind them.

The person who had opened the gate, so slow to open, so quick to close,
was attired in the long white robe of a Chartreuse monk, of which the
hood, falling over his face, completely concealed his features.




CHAPTER VII. THE CHARTREUSE OF SEILLON

Beyond doubt, like the first affiliated member met on the road to Sue by
the man who styled himself prophet, the monk who opened the gate was of
secondary rank in the fraternity; for, grasping the horse's bridle, he
held it while the rider dismounted, rendering the young man the service
of a groom.

Morgan got off, unfastened the valise, pulled the pistols from the
holsters, and placed them in his belt, next to those already there.
Addressing the monk in a tone of command, he said: "I thought I should
find the brothers assembled in council."

"They are assembled," replied the monk.

"Where?"

"At La Correrie. Suspicious persons have been seen prowling around the
Chartreuse these last few days, and orders have been issued to take the
greatest precautions."

The young man shrugged his shoulders as if he considered such
precautions useless, and, always in the same tone of command, said:
"Have some one take my horse to the stable and conduct me to the
council."

The monk summoned another brother, to whom he flung the bridle. He
lighted a torch at a lamp, in the little chapel which can still be
seen to the right of the great portal, and walked before the new-comer.
Crossing the cloister, he took a few steps in the garden, opened a door
leading into a sort of cistern, invited Morgan to enter, closed it as
carefully as he had the outer door, touched with his foot a stone which
seemed to be accidentally lying there, disclosed a ring and raised a
slab, which concealed a flight of steps leading down to a subterraneous
passage. This passage had a rounded roof and was wide enough to admit
two men walking abreast.


