"Don't be afraid; he is not so much of a devil as he appears."

Saying these words, d'Artagnan went upstairs, leaving his host a little
better satisfied with respect to two things in which he appeared to be
very much interested--his debt and his life.

At the top of the stairs, upon the most conspicuous door of the
corridor, was traced in black ink a gigantic number "1." d'Artagnan
knocked, and upon the bidding to come in which came from inside, he
entered the chamber.

Porthos was in bed, and was playing a game at LANSQUENET with
Mousqueton, to keep his hand in; while a spit loaded with partridges was
turning before the fire, and on each side of a large chimneypiece, over
two chafing dishes, were boiling two stewpans, from which exhaled
a double odor of rabbit and fish stews, rejoicing to the smell. In
addition to this he perceived that the top of a wardrobe and the marble
of a commode were covered with empty bottles.

At the sight of his friend, Porthos uttered a loud cry of joy; and
Mousqueton, rising respectfully, yielded his place to him, and went
to give an eye to the two stewpans, of which he appeared to have the
particular inspection.

"Ah, PARDIEU! Is that you?" said Porthos to d'Artagnan. "You are right
welcome. Excuse my not coming to meet you; but," added he, looking
at d'Artagnan with a certain degree of uneasiness, "you know what has
happened to me?"

"No."

"Has the host told you nothing, then?"

"I asked after you, and came up as soon as I could."

Porthos seemed to breathe more freely.

"And what has happened to you, my dear Porthos?" continued d'Artagnan.

"Why, on making a thrust at my adversary, whom I had already hit three
times, and whom I meant to finish with the fourth, I put my foot on a
stone, slipped, and strained my knee."

"Truly?"

"Honor! Luckily for the rascal, for I should have left him dead on the
spot, I assure you."

"And what has became of him?"

"Oh, I don't know; he had enough, and set off without waiting for the
rest. But you, my dear d'Artagnan, what has happened to you?"

"So that this strain of the knee," continued d'Artagnan, "my dear
Porthos, keeps you in bed?"

"My God, that's all. I shall be about again in a few days."

"Why did you not have yourself conveyed to Paris? You must be cruelly
bored here."

"That was my intention; but, my dear friend, I have one thing to confess
to you."

"What's that?"

"It is that as I was cruelly bored, as you say, and as I had the
seventy-five pistoles in my pocket which you had distributed to me, in
order to amuse myself I invited a gentleman who was traveling this way
to walk up, and proposed a cast of dice. He accepted my challenge, and,
my faith, my seventy-five pistoles passed from my pocket to his, without
reckoning my horse, which he won into the bargain. But you, my dear
d'Artagnan?"

"What can you expect, my dear Porthos; a man is not privileged in all
ways," said d'Artagnan. "You know the proverb 'Unlucky at play, lucky
in love.' You are too fortunate in your love for play not to take its
revenge. What consequence can the reverses of fortune be to you? Have
you not, happy rogue that you are--have you not your duchess, who cannot
fail to come to your aid?"

"Well, you see, my dear d'Artagnan, with what ill luck I play," replied
Porthos, with the most careless air in the world. "I wrote to her
to send me fifty louis or so, of which I stood absolutely in need on
account of my accident."

"Well?"

"Well, she must be at her country seat, for she has not answered me."

"Truly?"

"No; so I yesterday addressed another epistle to her, still more
pressing than the first. But you are here, my dear fellow, let us speak
of you. I confess I began to be very uneasy on your account."

"But your host behaves very well toward you, as it appears, my dear
Porthos," said d'Artagnan, directing the sick man's attention to the
full stewpans and the empty bottles.

"So, so," replied Porthos. "Only three or four days ago the impertinent
jackanapes gave me his bill, and I was forced to turn both him and his
bill out of the door; so that I am here something in the fashion of a
conqueror, holding my position, as it were, my conquest. So you see,
being in constant fear of being forced from that position, I am armed to
the teeth."

"And yet," said d'Artagnan, laughing, "it appears to me that from time
to time you must make SORTIES." And he again pointed to the bottles and
the stewpans.


