At the foot of the wall he stopped, but only for a few seconds. He
unhooked his cloak, rolled it into a ball, and tossed it over the wall.
The cloak off, he stood in a velvet coat, white leather breeches, and
top-boots. The coat was fastened round the waist by a belt in which were
a pair of pistols. A broad-brimmed hat covered his head and shaded his
face.

With the same rapidity with which he had removed his garment that might
have hindered his climbing the wall, he began to scale it. His foot
readily found a chink between the stones; he sprang up, seizing the
coping, and was on the other side without even touching the top of the
wall over which he bounded. He picked up his cloak, threw it over
his shoulder, hooked it, and crossed the orchard to a little door
communicating with the cloister. The clock struck eleven as he passed
through it. Roland stopped, counted the strokes, and slowly walked
around the cloister, looking and listening.

He saw nothing and heard no noise. The monastery was the picture of
desolation and solitude; the doors were all open, those of the cells,
the chapel, and the refectory. In the refectory, a vast hall where the
tables still stood in their places, Roland noticed five or six bats
circling around; a frightened owl flew through a broken casement, and
perched upon a tree close by, hooting dismally.

"Good!" said Roland, aloud; "I'll make my headquarters here; bats and
owls are the vanguards of ghosts."

The sound of that human voice, lifted in the midst of this solitude,
darkness and desolation, had something so uncanny, so lugubrious about
it, that it would have caused even the speaker to shudder, had not
Roland, as he himself said, been inaccessible to fear. He looked about
for a place from which he could command the entire hall. An isolated
table, placed on a sort of stage at one end of the refectory, which had
no doubt been used by the superior of the convent to take his food apart
from the monks, to read from pious books during the repast, seemed to
Roland best adapted to his needs. Here, backed by the wall, he could
not be surprised from behind, and, once his eye grew accustomed to the
darkness, he could survey every part of the hall. He looked for a seat,
and found an overturned stool about three feet from the table, probably
the one occupied by the reader or the person dining there in solitude.

Roland sat down at the table, loosened his cloak to insure greater
freedom of movement, took his pistols from his belt, laid one on the
table, and striking three blows with the butt-end of the other, he said,
in a loud voice: "The meeting is open; the ghosts can appear!"

Those who have passed through churches and cemeteries at night have
often experienced, without analyzing it, the supreme necessity of
speaking low and reverently which attaches to certain localities. Only
such persons can understand the strange impression produced on any
one who heard it by that curt, mocking voice which now disturbed the
solitude and the shadows. It vibrated an instant in the darkness, which
seemed to quiver with it; then it slowly died away without an echo,
escaping by all the many openings made by the wings of time.

As he had expected, Roland's eyes had accustomed themselves to the
darkness, and now, by the pale light of the rising moon, whose long,
white rays penetrated the refectory through the broken windows, he could
see distinctly from one end to the other of the vast apartment. Although
Roland was as evidently without fear internally as externally, he was
not without distrust, and his ear caught the slightest sounds.

He heard the half-hour strike. In spite of himself the sound startled
him, for it came from the bell of the convent. How was it that, in this
ruin where all was dead, a clock, the pulse of time, was living?

"Oh! oh!" said Roland; "that proves that I shall see something."

The words were spoken almost in an aside. The majesty of the place and
the silence acted upon that heart of iron, firm as the iron that had
just tolled the call of time upon eternity. The minutes slowly passed,
one after the other. Perhaps a cloud was passing between earth and
moon, for Roland fancied that the shadows deepened. Then, as midnight
approached, he seemed to hear a thousand confused, imperceptible sounds,
coming no doubt from the nocturnal universe which wakes while the other
sleeps. Nature permits no suspension of life, even for repose. She
created her nocturnal world, even as she created her daily world, from
the gnat which buzzes about the sleeper's pillow to the lion prowling
around the Arab's bivouac.

But Roland, the camp watcher, the sentinel of the desert, Roland, the
hunter, the soldier, knew all those sounds; they were powerless to
disturb him.

Then, mingling with these sounds, the tones of the clock, chiming the
hour, vibrated above his head. This time it was midnight. Roland counted
the twelve strokes, one after the other. The last hung, quivering upon
the air, like a bird with iron wings, then slowly expired, sad and
mournful. Just then the young man, thought he heard a moan. He listened
in the direction whence it came. Again he heard it, this time nearer at
hand.

