"Who are they?" replied the duke.

"In the first place, there is a little intrigante named Bonacieux."

"She is in the prison of Nantes."

"That is to say, she was there," replied Milady; "but the queen has
obtained an order from the king by means of which she has been conveyed
to a convent."

"To a convent?" said the duke.

"Yes, to a convent."

"And to which?"

"I don't know; the secret has been well kept."

"But I will know!"

"And your Eminence will tell me in what convent that woman is?"

"I can see nothing inconvenient in that," said the cardinal.

"Well, now I have an enemy much more to be dreaded by me than this
little Madame Bonacieux."

"Who is that?"

"Her lover."

"What is his name?"

"Oh, your Eminence knows him well," cried Milady, carried away by
her anger. "He is the evil genius of both of us. It is he who in an
encounter with your Eminence's Guards decided the victory in favor of
the king's Musketeers; it is he who gave three desperate wounds to de
Wardes, your emissary, and who caused the affair of the diamond studs
to fail; it is he who, knowing it was I who had Madame Bonacieux carried
off, has sworn my death."

"Ah, ah!" said the cardinal, "I know of whom you speak."

"I mean that miserable d'Artagnan."

"He is a bold fellow," said the cardinal.

"And it is exactly because he is a bold fellow that he is the more to be
feared."

"I must have," said the duke, "a proof of his connection with
Buckingham."

"A proof?" cried Milady; "I will have ten."

"Well, then, it becomes the simplest thing in the world; get me that
proof, and I will send him to the Bastille."

"So far good, monseigneur; but afterwards?"

"When once in the Bastille, there is no afterward!" said the cardinal,
in a low voice. "Ah, pardieu!" continued he, "if it were as easy for me
to get rid of my enemy as it is easy to get rid of yours, and if it were
against such people you require impunity--"

"Monseigneur," replied Milady, "a fair exchange. Life for life, man for
man; give me one, I will give you the other."

"I don't know what you mean, nor do I even desire to know what you
mean," replied the cardinal; "but I wish to please you, and see nothing
out of the way in giving you what you demand with respect to so infamous
a creature--the more so as you tell me this d'Artagnan is a libertine, a
duelist, and a traitor."

"An infamous scoundrel, monseigneur, a scoundrel!"

"Give me paper, a quill, and some ink, then," said the cardinal.

"Here they are, monseigneur."

There was a moment of silence, which proved that the cardinal was
employed in seeking the terms in which he should write the note, or else
in writing it. Athos, who had not lost a word of the conversation, took
his two companions by the hand, and led them to the other end of the
room.

"Well," said Porthos, "what do you want, and why do you not let us
listen to the end of the conversation?"

"Hush!" said Athos, speaking in a low voice. "We have heard all it was
necessary we should hear; besides, I don't prevent you from listening,
but I must be gone."

"You must be gone!" said Porthos; "and if the cardinal asks for you,
what answer can we make?"

"You will not wait till he asks; you will speak first, and tell him that
I am gone on the lookout, because certain expressions of our host have
given me reason to think the road is not safe. I will say two words
about it to the cardinal's esquire likewise. The rest concerns myself;
don't be uneasy about that."

"Be prudent, Athos," said Aramis.

"Be easy on that head," replied Athos; "you know I am cool enough."

Porthos and Aramis resumed their places by the stovepipe.

As to Athos, he went out without any mystery, took his horse, which was
tied with those of his friends to the fastenings of the shutters, in
four words convinced the attendant of the necessity of a vanguard for
their return, carefully examined the priming of his pistols, drew his
sword, and took, like a forlorn hope, the road to the camp.



