On the following evening, as we have said, Rosa returned with the Bible
of Cornelius de Witt.

Then began between the master and the pupil one of those charming scenes
which are the delight of the novelist who has to describe them.

The grated window, the only opening through which the two lovers were
able to communicate, was too high for conveniently reading a book,
although it had been quite convenient for them to read each other's
faces.

Rosa therefore had to press the open book against the grating edgewise,
holding above it in her right hand the lamp, but Cornelius hit upon the
lucky idea of fixing it to the bars, so as to afford her a little
rest. Rosa was then enabled to follow with her finger the letters
and syllables, which she was to spell for Cornelius, who with a straw
pointed out the letters to his attentive pupil through the holes of the
grating.

The light of the lamp illuminated the rich complexion of Rosa, her blue
liquid eyes, and her golden hair under her head-dress of gold brocade,
with her fingers held up, and showing in the blood, as it flowed
downwards in the veins that pale pink hue which shines before the light
owing to the living transparency of the flesh tint.

Rosa's intellect rapidly developed itself under the animating influence
of Cornelius, and when the difficulties seemed too arduous, the sympathy
of two loving hearts seemed to smooth them away.

And Rosa, after having returned to her room, repeated in her solitude
the reading lessons, and at the same time recalled all the delight which
she had felt whilst receiving them.

One evening she came half an hour later than usual. This was too
extraordinary an instance not to call forth at once Cornelius's
inquiries after its cause.

"Oh! do not be angry with me," she said, "it is not my fault. My father
has renewed an acquaintance with an old crony who used to visit him at
the Hague, and to ask him to let him see the prison. He is a good sort
of fellow, fond of his bottle, tells funny stories, and moreover is very
free with his money, so as always to be ready to stand a treat."

"You don't know anything further of him?" asked Cornelius, surprised.

"No," she answered; "it's only for about a fortnight that my father has
taken such a fancy to this friend who is so assiduous in visiting him."

"Ah, so," said Cornelius, shaking his head uneasily as every new
incident seemed to him to forebode some catastrophe; "very likely some
spy, one of those who are sent into jails to watch both prisoners and
their keepers."

"I don't believe that," said Rosa, smiling; "if that worthy person is
spying after any one, it is certainly not after my father."

"After whom, then?"

"Me, for instance."

"You?"

"Why not?" said Rosa, smiling.

"Ah, that's true," Cornelius observed, with a sigh. "You will not always
have suitors in vain; this man may become your husband."

"I don't say anything to the contrary."

"What cause have you to entertain such a happy prospect?"

"Rather say, this fear, Mynheer Cornelius."

"Thank you, Rosa, you are right; well, I will say then, this fear?"

"I have only this reason----"


