If we insist upon these details, it is because we shall be obliged to
return to this spot later, and we do not wish it to be wholly unfamiliar
to our readers when that time comes.

These steps led first to the ante-chamber of the prison, that is to say
to the porter's hall of the lower court-room. From that hall ten steps
led down into an inner court, separated from a third, which was that of
the prisoners, by a wall similar to the one we have described, only this
one had three doors. At the further end of the courtyard a passage led
to the jailer's own room, which gave into a second passage, on which
were the cells which were picturesquely styled cages. The jailer paused
before the first of these cages and said, striking the door:

"This is where I put madame, your mother, and your sister, so that if
the dear ladies wanted either Charlotte or myself, they need but knock."

"Is there any one in the cell?"

"No one"

"Then please open the door. My friend, Lord Tanlay, is a philanthropic
Englishman who is travelling about to see if the French prisons are more
comfortable than the English ones. Enter, Sir John."

Père Courtois having opened the door, Roland pushed Sir John into a
perfectly square cell measuring ten or twelve feet each way.

"Oh, oh!" exclaimed Sir John, "this is lugubrious."

"Do you think so? Well, my dear friend, this is where my mother, the
noblest woman in the world, and my sister, whom you know, spent six
weeks with a prospect of leaving it only to make the trip to the Place
de Bastion. Just think, that was five years ago, so my sister was
scarcely twelve."

"But what crime had they committed?"

"Oh! a monstrous crime. At the anniversary festival with which the town
of Bourg considered proper to commemorate the death of the 'Friend of
the People,' my mother refused to permit my sister to represent one of
the virgins who bore the tears of France in vases. What will you! Poor
woman, she thought she had done enough for her country in giving it
the blood of her son and her husband, which was flowing in Italy and
Germany. She was mistaken. Her country, as it seems, claimed further the
tears of her daughter. She thought that too much, especially as those
tears were to flow for the citizen Marat. The result was that on the
very evening of the celebration, during the enthusiastic exaltation,
my mother was declared accused. Fortunately Bourg had not attained the
celerity of Paris. A friend of ours, an official in the record-office,
kept the affair dragging, until one fine day the fall and death of
Robespierre were made known. That interrupted a good many things, among
others the guillotinades. Our friend convinced the authorities that the
wind blowing from Paris had veered toward clemency; they waited fifteen
days, and on the sixteenth they told my mother and sister that they were
free. So you understand, my friend--and this involves the most profound
philosophical reflection--so that if Mademoiselle Teresa Cabarrus had
not come from Spain, if she had not married M. Fontenay, parliamentary
counsellor; had she not been arrested and brought before the pro-consul
Tallien, son of the Marquis de Bercy's butler, ex-notary's clerk,
ex-foreman of a printing-shop, ex-porter, ex-secretary to the Commune
of Paris temporarily at Bordeaux; and had the ex-pro-consul not become
enamored of her, and had she not been imprisoned, and if on the ninth
of Thermidor she had not found means to send a dagger with these words:
'Unless the tyrant dies to-day, I die to-morrow'; had not Saint-Just
been arrested in the midst of his discourse; had not Robespierre, on
that day, had a frog in his throat; had not Garnier de l'Aube exclaimed:
'It is the blood of Danton choking you!' had not Louchet shouted for his
arrest; had he not been arrested, released by the Commune, recaptured
in spite of this, had his jaw broken by a pistol shot, and been executed
next day--my mother would, in all probability, have had her head cut off
for refusing to allow her daughter to weep for citizen Marat in one of
the twelve lachrymal urns which Bourg was desirous of filling with its
tears. Good-by, Courtois. You are a worthy man. You gave my mother and
sister a little water to put with their wine, a little meat to eat with
their bread, a little hope to fill their hearts; you lent them your
daughter that they might not have to sweep their cell themselves. That
deserves a fortune. Unfortunately I am not rich; but here are fifty
louis I happen to have with me. Come, my lord."

And the young man carried off Sir John before the jailer, recovered from
his surprise and found time either to thank Roland or refuse the fifty
louis; which, it must be said, would have been a remarkable proof of
disinterestedness in a jailer, especially when that jailer's opinions
were opposed to those of the government he served.

Leaving the prison, Roland and Sir John found the Place des Lices
crowded with people who had heard of General Bonaparte's return
to France, and were shouting "Vive Bonaparte!" at the top of their
lungs--some because they really admired the victor of Arcola, Rivoli,
and the Pyramids, others because they had been told, like Père Courtois,
that this same victor had vanquished only that Louis XVIII. might profit
by his victories.


