"You ask me things, gentlemen, to which I can answer only the exact
truth. Hear it. The parcel was put into my hands in the way I have
described; I vow before God that I was, and am still, ignorant of its
contents, and that it was not until my arrest that I learned that this
deposit was the correspondence of the Grand Pensionary with the Marquis
de Louvois. And lastly, I vow and protest that I do not understand how
any one should have known that this parcel was in my house; and,
above all, how I can be deemed criminal for having received what my
illustrious and unfortunate godfather brought to my house."

This was Van Baerle's whole defence; after which the judges began to
deliberate on the verdict.

They considered that every offshoot of civil discord is mischievous,
because it revives the contest which it is the interest of all to put
down.

One of them, who bore the character of a profound observer, laid down
as his opinion that this young man, so phlegmatic in appearance, must
in reality be very dangerous, as under this icy exterior he was sure to
conceal an ardent desire to avenge his friends, the De Witts.

Another observed that the love of tulips agreed perfectly well with that
of politics, and that it was proved in history that many very dangerous
men were engaged in gardening, just as if it had been their profession,
whilst really they occupied themselves with perfectly different
concerns; witness Tarquin the Elder, who grew poppies at Gabii, and the
Great Conde, who watered his carnations at the dungeon of Vincennes at
the very moment when the former meditated his return to Rome, and the
latter his escape from prison.

The judge summed up with the following dilemma:--

"Either Cornelius van Baerle is a great lover of tulips, or a great
lover of politics; in either case, he has told us a falsehood; first,
because his having occupied himself with politics is proved by the
letters which were found at his house; and secondly, because his having
occupied himself with tulips is proved by the bulbs which leave no doubt
of the fact. And herein lies the enormity of the case. As Cornelius
van Baerle was concerned in the growing of tulips and in the pursuit of
politics at one and the same time, the prisoner is of hybrid character,
of an amphibious organisation, working with equal ardour at politics and
at tulips, which proves him to belong to the class of men most dangerous
to public tranquillity, and shows a certain, or rather a complete,
analogy between his character and that of those master minds of which
Tarquin the Elder and the Great Conde have been felicitously quoted as
examples."

The upshot of all these reasonings was, that his Highness the Prince
Stadtholder of Holland would feel infinitely obliged to the magistracy
of the Hague if they simplified for him the government of the Seven
Provinces by destroying even the least germ of conspiracy against his
authority.

This argument capped all the others, and, in order so much the more
effectually to destroy the germ of conspiracy, sentence of death was
unanimously pronounced against Cornelius van Baerle, as being
arraigned, and convicted, for having, under the innocent appearance of
a tulip-fancier, participated in the detestable intrigues and abominable
plots of the brothers De Witt against Dutch nationality and in their
secret relations with their French enemy.

A supplementary clause was tacked to the sentence, to the effect that
"the aforesaid Cornelius van Baerle should be led from the prison of the
Buytenhof to the scaffold in the yard of the same name, where the public
executioner would cut off his head."

As this deliberation was a most serious affair, it lasted a full
half-hour, during which the prisoner was remanded to his cell.

There the Recorder of the States came to read the sentence to him.

Master Gryphus was detained in bed by the fever caused by the fracture
of his arm. His keys passed into the hands of one of his assistants.
Behind this turnkey, who introduced the Recorder, Rosa, the fair Frisian
maid, had slipped into the recess of the door, with a handkerchief to
her mouth to stifle her sobs.

Cornelius listened to the sentence with an expression rather of surprise
than sadness.

After the sentence was read, the Recorder asked him whether he had
anything to answer.

"Indeed, I have not," he replied. "Only I confess that, among all the
causes of death against which a cautious man may guard, I should never
have supposed this to be comprised."

On this answer, the Recorder saluted Van Baerle with all that
consideration which such functionaries generally bestow upon great
criminals of every sort.

But whilst he was about to withdraw, Cornelius asked, "By the bye, Mr.
Recorder, what day is the thing--you know what I mean--to take place?"

"Why, to-day," answered the Recorder, a little surprised by the
self-possession of the condemned man.

A sob was heard behind the door, and Cornelius turned round to look from
whom it came; but Rosa, who had foreseen this movement, had fallen back.

"And," continued Cornelius, "what hour is appointed?"

"Twelve o'clock, sir."

"Indeed," said Cornelius, "I think I heard the clock strike ten about
twenty minutes ago; I have not much time to spare."

"Indeed you have not, if you wish to make your peace with God," said
the Recorder, bowing to the ground. "You may ask for any clergyman you
please."

Saying these words he went out backwards, and the assistant turnkey was
going to follow him, and to lock the door of Cornelius's cell, when a
white and trembling arm interposed between him and the heavy door.

Cornelius saw nothing but the golden brocade cap, tipped with lace, such
as the Frisian girls wore; he heard nothing but some one whispering into
the ear of the turnkey. But the latter put his heavy keys into the
white hand which was stretched out to receive them, and, descending
some steps, sat down on the staircase which was thus guarded above
by himself, and below by the dog. The head-dress turned round, and
Cornelius beheld the face of Rosa, blanched with grief, and her
beautiful eyes streaming with tears.

She went up to Cornelius, crossing her arms on her heaving breast.

"Oh, sir, sir!" she said, but sobs choked her utterance.

"My good girl," Cornelius replied with emotion, "what do you wish? I may
tell you that my time on earth is short."

"I come to ask a favour of you," said Rosa, extending her arms partly
towards him and partly towards heaven.

"Don't weep so, Rosa," said the prisoner, "for your tears go much more
to my heart than my approaching fate, and you know, the less guilty a
prisoner is, the more it is his duty to die calmly, and even joyfully,
as he dies a martyr. Come, there's a dear, don't cry any more, and tell
me what you want, my pretty Rosa."

She fell on her knees. "Forgive my father," she said.

"Your father, your father!" said Cornelius, astonished.

"Yes, he has been so harsh to you; but it is his nature, he is so to
every one, and you are not the only one whom he has bullied."

"He is punished, my dear Rosa, more than punished, by the accident that
has befallen him, and I forgive him."

"I thank you, sir," said Rosa. "And now tell me--oh, tell me--can I do
anything for you?"

"You can dry your beautiful eyes, my dear child," answered Cornelius,
with a good-tempered smile.

"But what can I do for you,--for you I mean?"

"A man who has only one hour longer to live must be a great Sybarite
still to want anything, my dear Rosa."

"The clergyman whom they have proposed to you?"

"I have worshipped God all my life, I have worshipped Him in His works,
and praised Him in His decrees. I am at peace with Him and do not wish
for a clergyman. The last thought which occupies my mind, however has
reference to the glory of the Almighty, and, indeed, my dear, I should
ask you to help me in carrying out this last thought."

"Oh, Mynheer Cornelius, speak, speak!" exclaimed Rosa, still bathed in
tears.

"Give me your hand, and promise me not to laugh, my dear child."

"Laugh," exclaimed Rosa, frantic with grief, "laugh at this moment! do
you not see my tears?"

"Rosa, you are no stranger to me. I have not seen much of you, but that
little is enough to make me appreciate your character. I have never seen
a woman more fair or more pure than you are, and if from this moment I
take no more notice of you, forgive me; it is only because, on leaving
this world, I do not wish to have any further regret."

Rosa felt a shudder creeping over her frame, for, whilst the prisoner
pronounced these words, the belfry clock of the Buytenhof struck eleven.

Cornelius understood her. "Yes, yes, let us make haste," he said, "you
are right, Rosa."

Then, taking the paper with the three suckers from his breast, where he
had again put it, since he had no longer any fear of being searched,
he said: "My dear girl, I have been very fond of flowers. That was at a
time when I did not know that there was anything else to be loved. Don't
blush, Rosa, nor turn away; and even if I were making you a declaration
of love, alas! poor dear, it would be of no more consequence. Down there
in the yard, there is an instrument of steel, which in sixty minutes
will put an end to my boldness. Well, Rosa, I loved flowers dearly, and
I have found, or at least I believe so, the secret of the great black
tulip, which it has been considered impossible to grow, and for which,
as you know, or may not know, a prize of a hundred thousand guilders
has been offered by the Horticultural Society of Haarlem. These hundred
thousand guilders--and Heaven knows I do not regret them--these hundred
thousand guilders I have here in this paper, for they are won by the
three bulbs wrapped up in it, which you may take, Rosa, as I make you a
present of them."


