"When I awoke, a fresh meal was served.

"This time, in spite of my terrors, in spite of my agony, I began to
feel a devouring hunger. It was forty-eight hours since I had taken
any nourishment. I ate some bread and some fruit; then, remembering the
narcotic mixed with the water I had drunk, I would not touch that which
was placed on the table, but filled my glass at a marble fountain fixed
in the wall over my dressing table.

"And yet, notwithstanding these precautions, I remained for some time in
a terrible agitation of mind. But my fears were this time ill-founded; I
passed the day without experiencing anything of the kind I dreaded.

"I took the precaution to half empty the carafe, in order that my
suspicions might not be noticed.

"The evening came on, and with it darkness; but however profound was
this darkness, my eyes began to accustom themselves to it. I saw, amid
the shadows, the table sink through the floor; a quarter of an hour
later it reappeared, bearing my supper. In an instant, thanks to the
lamp, my chamber was once more lighted.

"I was determined to eat only such things as could not possibly have
anything soporific introduced into them. Two eggs and some fruit
composed my repast; then I drew another glass of water from my
protecting fountain, and drank it.

"At the first swallow, it appeared to me not to have the same taste
as in the morning. Suspicion instantly seized me. I paused, but I had
already drunk half a glass.

"I threw the rest away with horror, and waited, with the dew of fear
upon my brow.

"No doubt some invisible witness had seen me draw the water from that
fountain, and had taken advantage of my confidence in it, the better to
assure my ruin, so coolly resolved upon, so cruelly pursued.

"Half an hour had not passed when the same symptoms began to appear; but
as I had only drunk half a glass of the water, I contended longer, and
instead of falling entirely asleep, I sank into a state of drowsiness
which left me a perception of what was passing around me, while
depriving me of the strength either to defend myself or to fly.

"I dragged myself toward the bed, to seek the only defense I had
left--my saving knife; but I could not reach the bolster. I sank on my
knees, my hands clasped round one of the bedposts; then I felt that I
was lost."

Felton became frightfully pale, and a convulsive tremor crept through
his whole body.

"And what was most frightful," continued Milady, her voice altered, as
if she still experienced the same agony as at that awful minute,
"was that at this time I retained a consciousness of the danger that
threatened me; was that my soul, if I may say so, waked in my sleeping
body; was that I saw, that I heard. It is true that all was like a
dream, but it was not the less frightful.

"I saw the lamp ascend, and leave me in darkness; then I heard the
well-known creaking of the door although I had heard that door open but
twice.

"I felt instinctively that someone approached me; it is said that the
doomed wretch in the deserts of America thus feels the approach of the
serpent.

"I wished to make an effort; I attempted to cry out. By an incredible
effort of will I even raised myself up, but only to sink down again
immediately, and to fall into the arms of my persecutor."

"Tell me who this man was!" cried the young officer.

Milady saw at a single glance all the painful feelings she inspired in
Felton by dwelling on every detail of her recital; but she would not
spare him a single pang. The more profoundly she wounded his heart, the
more certainly he would avenge her. She continued, then, as if she had
not heard his exclamation, or as if she thought the moment was not yet
come to reply to it.

"Only this time it was no longer an inert body, without feeling, that
the villain had to deal with. I have told you that without being able to
regain the complete exercise of my faculties, I retained the sense of my
danger. I struggled, then, with all my strength, and doubtless opposed,
weak as I was, a long resistance, for I heard him cry out, 'These
miserable Puritans! I knew very well that they tired out their
executioners, but I did not believe them so strong against their
lovers!'

"Alas! this desperate resistance could not last long. I felt my strength
fail, and this time it was not my sleep that enabled the coward to
prevail, but my swoon."

Felton listened without uttering any word or sound, except an inward
expression of agony. The sweat streamed down his marble forehead, and
his hand, under his coat, tore his breast.

"My first impulse, on coming to myself, was to feel under my pillow for
the knife I had not been able to reach; if it had not been useful for
defense, it might at least serve for expiation.

"But on taking this knife, Felton, a terrible idea occurred to me. I
have sworn to tell you all, and I will tell you all. I have promised you
the truth; I will tell it, were it to destroy me."

"The idea came into your mind to avenge yourself on this man, did it
not?" cried Felton.

"Yes," said Milady. "The idea was not that of a Christian, I knew;
but without doubt, that eternal enemy of our souls, that lion roaring
constantly around us, breathed it into my mind. In short, what shall I
say to you, Felton?" continued Milady, in the tone of a woman accusing
herself of a crime. "This idea occurred to me, and did not leave me; it
is of this homicidal thought that I now bear the punishment."

"Continue, continue!" said Felton; "I am eager to see you attain your
vengeance!"

"Oh, I resolved that it should take place as soon as possible. I had no
doubt he would return the following night. During the day I had nothing
to fear.

"When the hour of breakfast came, therefore, I did not hesitate to eat
and drink. I had determined to make believe sup, but to eat nothing. I
was forced, then, to combat the fast of the evening with the nourishment
of the morning.

"Only I concealed a glass of water, which remained after my breakfast,
thirst having been the chief of my sufferings when I remained
forty-eight hours without eating or drinking.

"The day passed away without having any other influence on me than to
strengthen the resolution I had formed; only I took care that my face
should not betray the thoughts of my heart, for I had no doubt I was
watched. Several times, even, I felt a smile on my lips. Felton, I dare
not tell you at what idea I smiled; you would hold me in horror--"

"Go on! go on!" said Felton; "you see plainly that I listen, and that I
am anxious to know the end."

"Evening came; the ordinary events took place. During the darkness, as
before, my supper was brought. Then the lamp was lighted, and I sat down
to table. I only ate some fruit. I pretended to pour out water from
the jug, but I only drank that which I had saved in my glass. The
substitution was made so carefully that my spies, if I had any, could
have no suspicion of it.

"After supper I exhibited the same marks of languor as on the preceding
evening; but this time, as I yielded to fatigue, or as if I had become
familiarized with danger, I dragged myself toward my bed, let my robe
fall, and lay down.


