Since the middle of Lent they had awaited the approach of spring, and
each morning repeated: "Everything is starting out!" But the season was
late, and they consoled their impatience by saying: "Everything is going
to start out!"

At length they were able to gather the green peas. The asparagus gave a
good crop; and the vine was promising.

Since they were able to work together at gardening, they must needs
succeed at agriculture; and they were seized with an ambition to
cultivate the farm. With common sense and study of the subject, they
would get through it beyond a doubt.

But they should first see how others carried on operations, and so they
drew up a letter in which they begged of M. de Faverges to do them the
honour of allowing them to visit the lands which he cultivated.

The count made an appointment immediately to meet them.

After an hour's walking, they reached the side of a hill overlooking the
valley of the Orne. The river wound its way to the bottom of the valley.
Blocks of red sandstone stood here and there, and in the distance larger
masses of stone formed, as it were, a cliff overhanging fields of ripe
corn. On the opposite hill the verdure was so abundant that it hid the
house from view. Trees divided it into unequal squares, outlining
themselves amid the grass by more sombre lines.

Suddenly the entire estate came into view. The tiled roofs showed where
the farm stood. To the right rose the château with its white façade, and
beyond it was a wood. A lawn descended to the river, into which a row of
plane trees cast their shadows.

The two friends entered a field of lucern, which people were spreading.
Women wearing straw hats, with cotton handkerchiefs round their heads,
and paper shades, were lifting with rakes the hay which lay on the
ground, while at the end of the plain, near the stacks, bundles were
being rapidly flung into a long cart, yoked to three horses.

The count advanced, followed by his manager. He was dressed in dimity;
and his stiff figure and mutton-chop whiskers gave him at the same time
the air of a magistrate and a dandy. Even when he was speaking, his
features did not appear to move.

As soon as they had exchanged some opening courtesies, he explained his
system with regard to fodder: the swathes should be turned without
scattering them; the ricks should be conical, and the bundles made
immediately on the spot, and then piled together by tens. As for the
English rake, the meadow was too uneven for such an implement.

A little girl, with her stockingless feet in old shoes, and showing her
skin through the rents in her dress, was supplying the women with cider,
which she poured out of a jug supported against her hip. The count asked
where this child came from, but nobody could tell. The women who were
making the hay had picked her up to wait on them during the harvesting.
He shrugged his shoulders, and just as he was moving away from the spot,
he gave vent to some complaints as to the immorality of our country
districts
