Hurel stopped under the beech row to adjust his frock-coat. Then the
curé stepped forward, arrayed in a new cassock, and, a second later, M.
Foureau, in a velvet waistcoat. The doctor gave his arm to his wife,
who walked with some difficulty, assisting herself with her parasol. A
stream of red ribbons fluttered behind them--it was the cap of Madame
Bordin, who was dressed in a lovely robe of shot silk. The gold chain of
her watch dangled over her breast, and rings glittered on both her
hands, which were partly covered with black mittens. Finally appeared
the notary, with a Panama hat on his head, and an eyeglass--for the
professional practitioner had not stifled in him the man of the world.
The drawing-room floor was waxed so that one could not stand upright
there. The eight Utrecht armchairs had their backs to the wall; a round
table in the centre supported the liqueur case; and above the
mantelpiece could be seen the portrait of Père Bouvard. The shades,
reappearing in the imperfect light, made the mouth grin and the eyes
squint, and a slight mouldiness on the cheek-bones seemed to produce the
illusion of real whiskers. The guests traced a resemblance between him
and his son, and Madame Bordin added, glancing at Bouvard, that he must
have been a very fine man.

After an hour's waiting, Pécuchet announced that they might pass into
the dining-room.

The white calico curtains with red borders were, like those of the
drawing-room, completely drawn before the windows, and the sun's rays
passing across them, flung a brilliant light on the wainscotings, the
only ornament of which was a barometer.

Bouvard placed the two ladies beside him, while Pécuchet had the mayor
on his left and the curé on his right.

They began with the oysters. They had the taste of mud. Bouvard was
annoyed, and was prodigal of excuses, and Pécuchet got up in order to
go into the kitchen and make a scene with Beljambe.

During the whole of the first course, which consisted of a brill with a
vol-au-vent and stewed pigeons, the conversation turned on the mode of
manufacturing cider; after which they discussed what meats were
digestible or indigestible. Naturally, the doctor was consulted. He
looked at matters sceptically, like a man who had dived into the depths
of science, and yet did not brook the slightest contradiction.

At the same time, with the sirloin of beef, Burgundy was supplied. It
was muddy. Bouvard, attributing this accident to the rinsing of the
bottles, got them to try three others without more success; then he
poured out some St. Julien, manifestly not long enough in bottle, and
all the guests were mute. Hurel smiled without discontinuing; the heavy
steps of the waiters resounded over the flooring.

Madame Vaucorbeil, who was dumpy and waddling in her gait (she was near
her confinement), had maintained absolute silence. Bouvard, not knowing
what to talk to her about, spoke of the theatre at Caen.

"My wife never goes to the play," interposed the doctor.

M. Marescot observed that, when he lived in Paris, he used to go only to
the Italian operas.

"For my part," said Bouvard, "I used to pay for a seat in the pit
sometimes at the Vaudeville to hear farces."

Foureau asked Madame Bordin whether she liked farces.

"That depends on what kind they are," she said.

The mayor rallied her. She made sharp rejoinders to his pleasantries.
Then she mentioned a recipe for preparing gherkins. However, her talents
for housekeeping were well known, and she had a little farm, which was
admirably looked after.

Foureau asked Bouvard, "Is it your intention to sell yours?"

"Upon my word, up to this I don't know what to do exactly."

"What! not even the Escalles piece?" interposed the notary. "That would
suit you, Madame Bordin."

The widow replied in an affected manner:

"The demands of M. Bouvard would be too high."

"Perhaps someone could soften him."

"I will not try."


