"Your passports?"

It was the field-guard on his rounds, and, at the same instant, the man
from the custom-house came up, having hastened through a ravine.

"Take them into custody for me, Père Morin, or the cliff will fall in!"

"It is for a scientific object," replied Pécuchet.

Then a mass of stone fell, grazing them all four so closely that a
little more and they were dead men.

When the dust was scattered, they recognised the mast of a ship, which
crumbled under the custom-house officer's boot.

Bouvard said with a sigh, "We did no great harm!"

"One should not do anything within the fortification limits," returned
the guard.

"In the first place, who are you, in order that I may take out a summons
against you?"

Pécuchet refused to give his name, cried out against such injustice.

"Don't argue! follow me!"

As soon as they reached the port a crowd of ragamuffins ran after them.
Bouvard, red as a poppy, put on an air of dignity; Pécuchet, exceedingly
pale, darted furious looks around; and these two strangers, carrying
stones in their pocket-handkerchiefs, did not present a good appearance.
Provisionally, they put them up at the inn, whose master on the
threshold guarded the entrance. Then the mason came to demand back his
tools. They were paying him for them, and still there were incidental
expenses!--and the field-guard did not come back! Wherefore? At last, a
gentleman, who wore the cross of the Legion of Honour, set them free,
and they went away, after giving their Christian names, surnames, and
their domicile, with an undertaking on their part to be more circumspect
in future.

Besides a passport, they were in need of many things, and before
undertaking fresh explorations they consulted the _Geological
Traveller's Guide_, by Boné. It was necessary to have, in the first
place, a good soldier's knapsack, then a surveyor's chain, a file, a
pair of nippers, a compass, and three hammers, passed into a belt, which
is hidden under the frock-coat, and "thus preserves you from that
original appearance which one ought to avoid on a journey." As for the
stick, Pécuchet freely adopted the tourist's stick, six feet high, with
a long iron point. Bouvard preferred the walking-stick umbrella, or
many-branched umbrella, the knob of which is removed in order to clasp
on the silk, which is kept separately in a little bag. They did not
forget strong shoes with gaiters, "two pairs of braces" each "on account
of perspiration," and, although one cannot present himself everywhere
in a cap, they shrank from the expense of "one of those folding hats,
which bear the name of 'Gibus,' their inventor."

The same work gives precepts for conduct: "To know the language of the
part of the country you visit": they knew it. "To preserve a modest
deportment": this was their custom. "Not to have too much money about
you": nothing simpler. Finally, in order to spare yourself
embarrassments of all descriptions, it is a good thing to adopt the
"description of engineer."

"Well, we will adopt it."

Thus prepared, they began their excursions; were sometimes eight days
away, and passed their lives in the open air.

Sometimes they saw, on the banks of the Orne, in a rent, pieces of rock
raising their slanting surfaces between some poplar trees and heather;
or else they were grieved by meeting, for the entire length of the road,
nothing but layers of clay. In the presence of a landscape they admired
neither the series of perspectives nor the depth of the backgrounds, nor
the undulations of the green surfaces; but that which was not visible to
them, the underpart, the earth: and for them every hill was only a fresh
proof of the Deluge.

To the Deluge mania succeeded that of erratic blocks. The big stones
alone in the fields must come from vanished glaciers, and they searched
for moraines and faluns.

They were several times taken for pedlars on account of their equipage;
and when they had answered that they were "engineers," a dread seized
them--the usurpation of such a title might entail unpleasant
consequences.


