Instantly now, when Hermann had ceased, the talkative neighbor
 Took up the word, and cried: "Oh happy, in days like the present,
 Days of flight and confusion, who lives by himself in his dwelling,
 Having no wife nor child to be clinging about him in terror!
 Happy I feel myself now, and would not for much be called father;
 Would not have wife and children to-day, for whom to be anxious.
 Oft have I thought of this flight before; and have packed up together
 All my best things already, the chains and old pieces of money
 That were my sainted mother's, of which not one has been sold yet.
 Much would be left behind, it is true, not easily gotten.
 Even the roots and the herbs, that were with such industry gathered,
 I should be sorry to lose, though the worth of the goods is but trifling.
 If my purveyor remained, I could go from my dwelling contented.
 When my cash I have brought away safe, and have rescued my person,
 All is safe: none find it so easy to fly as the single."

 "Neighbor," unto his words young Hermann with emphasis answered:
 "I can in no wise agree with thee here, and censure thy language.
 Is he indeed a man to be prized, who, in good and in evil,
 Takes no thought but for self, and gladness and sorrow with others
 Knows not how to divide, nor feels his heart so impel him?
 Rather than ever to-day would I make up my mind to be married:
 Many a worthy maiden is needing a husband's protection,
 And the man needs an inspiriting wife when ill is impending."

 Thereupon smiling the father replied: "Thus love I to hear thee!
 That is a sensible word such as rarely I've known thee to utter."
 Straightway, however, the mother broke in with quickness, exclaiming:
 "Son, to be sure, thou art right! we parents have set the example;
 Seeing that not in our season of joy did we choose one another;
 Rather the saddest of hours it was that bound us together.
 Monday morning--I mind it well; for the day that preceded
 Came that terrible fire by which our city was ravaged--
 Twenty years will have gone. The day was a Sunday as this is;
 Hot and dry was the season; the water was almost exhausted.
 All the people were strolling abroad in their holiday dresses,
 'Mong the villages partly, and part in the mills and the taverns.
 And at the end of the city the flames began, and went coursing
 Quickly along the streets, creating a draught in their passage.
 Burned were the barns where the copious harvest already was garnered;
 Burned were the streets as far as the market; the house of my father,
 Neighbor to this, was destroyed, and this one also fell with it.
 Little we managed to save. I sat, that sorrowful night through,
 Outside the town on the common, to guard the beds and the boxes.
 Sleep overtook me at last, and when I again was awakened,
 Feeling the chill of the morning that always descends before sunrise,
 There were the smoke and the glare, and the walls and chimneys in ruins.
 Then fell a weight on my heart; but more majestic than ever
 Came up the sun again, inspiring my bosom with courage.
 Then I rose hastily up, with a yearning the place to revisit
 Whereon our dwelling had stood, and to see if the hens had been rescued,
 Which I especially loved, for I still was a child in my feelings.
 Thus as I over the still-smoking timbers of house and of court-yard
 Picked my way, and beheld the dwelling so ruined and wasted,
 Thou camest up to examine the place, from the other direction.
 Under the ruins thy horse in his stall had been buried; the rubbish
 Lay on the spot and the glimmering beams; of the horse we saw nothing.
 Thoughtful and grieving we stood there thus, each facing the other,
 Now that the wall was fallen that once had divided our court-yards.
 Thereupon thou by the hand didst take me, and speak to me, saying,--
 'Lisa, how earnest thou hither? Go back! thy soles must be burning;
 Hot the rubbish is here: it scorches my boots, which are stronger.'
 And thou didst lift me up, and carry me out through thy court-yard.
 There was the door of the house left standing yet with its archway,
 Just as 'tis standing now, the one thing only remaining.
 Then thou didst set me down and kiss me; to that I objected;
 But thou didst answer and say with kindly significant language:
 'See! my house lies in ruins: remain here and help me rebuild it;
 So shall my help in return be given to building thy father's.'
 Yet did I not comprehend thee until thou sentest thy mother
 Unto my father, and quick were the happy espousals accomplished.
 E'en to this day I remember with joy those half-consumed timbers,
 And I can see once more the sun coming up in such splendor;
 For 'twas the day that gave me my husband; and, ere the first season
 Passed of that wild desolation, a son to my youth had been given.
 Therefore I praise thee, Hermann, that thou, with an honest assurance,
 Shouldst, in these sorrowful days, be thinking thyself of a maiden,
 And amid ruins and war shouldst thus have the courage to woo her."

 Straightway, then, and with warmth, the father replied to her, saying:
 "Worthy of praise is the feeling, and truthful also the story,
 Mother, that thou hast related; for so indeed everything happened.
 Better, however, is better. It is not the business of all men
 Thus their life and estate to begin from the very foundation:
 Every one needs not to worry himself as we and the rest did.
 Oh, how happy is he whose father and mother shall give him,
 Furnished and ready, a house which he can adorn with his increase.
 Every beginning is hard; but most the beginning a household.
 Many are human wants, and every thing daily grows dearer,
 So that a man must consider the means of increasing his earnings.
 This I hope therefore of thee, my Hermann, that into our dwelling
 Thou wilt be bringing ere long a bride who is handsomely dowered;
 For it is meet that a gallant young man have an opulent maiden.
 Great is the comfort of home whene'er, with the woman elected,
 Enter the useful presents, besides, in box and in basket.
 Not for this many a year in vain has the mother been busy
 Making her daughter's linens of strong and delicate texture;
 God-parents have not in vain been giving their vessels of silver,
 And the father laid by in his desk the rare pieces of money;
 For there a day will come when she, with her gifts and possessions,
 Shall that youth rejoice who has chosen her out of all others.
 Well do I know how good in a house is a woman's position,
 Who her own furniture round her knows, in kitchen and chamber;
 Who herself the bed and herself the table has covered.
 Only a well-dowered bride should I like to receive to my dwelling.
 She who is poor is sure, in the end, to be scorned by her husband;
 And will as servant be held, who as servant came in with her bundle.
 Men will remain unjust when the season of love is gone over.
 Yes, my Hermann, thy father's old age thou greatly canst gladden,
 If thou a daughter-in-law will speedily bring to my dwelling,
 Out of the neighborhood here,--from the house over yonder, the green one.
 Rich is the man, I can tell thee. His manufactures and traffic
 Daily are making him richer; for whence draws the merchant not profit?
 Three daughters only he has, to divide his fortune among them.
 True that the eldest already is taken; but there is the second
 Still to be had, as well as the third; and not long so, it may be.
 I would never have lingered till now, had I been in thy place;
 But had fetched one of the maidens, as once I bore off thy dear mother."
 Modestly then did the son to the urgent father answer;
 "Truly 'twas my wish too, as well as thine own, to have chosen
 One of our neighbor's daughters, for we had been brought up together;
 Played, in the early days, about the market-place fountain;
 And, from the other boys' rudeness, I often have been their defender.
 That, though, is long since past: the girls, as they grew to be older,
 Properly stayed in the house, and shunned the more boisterous pastimes.
 Well brought up are they, surely! I used sometimes to go over,
 Partly to gratify thee, and because of our former acquaintance:
 But no pleasure I ever could take in being among them;
 For I was always obliged to endure their censures upon me.
 Quite too long was my coat, the cloth too coarse, and the color
 Quite too common; my hair was not cropped, as it should be, and frizzled.
 I was resolved, at last, that I, also, would dress myself finely,
 Just as those office-boys do who always are seen there on Sundays,
 Wearing in summer their half-silken flaps, that dangled about them;
 But I discovered, betimes, they made ever a laughing-stock of me.
 And I was vexed when I saw it,--it wounded my pride; but more deeply
 Felt I aggrieved that they the good-will should so far misinterpret
 That in my heart I bore them,--especially Minna the youngest.
 It was on Easter-day that last I went over to see them;
 Wearing my best new coat, that is now hanging up in the closet,
 And having frizzled my hair, like that of the other young fellows.
 Soon as I entered, they tittered; but that not at me, as I fancied.
 Minna before the piano was seated; the father was present,
 Hearing his daughters sing, and full of delight and good-humor.
 Much I could not understand of all that was said in the singing;
 But of Pamina I often heard, and oft of Tamino:
 And I, besides, could not stay there dumb; so, as soon as she ended,
 Something about the words I asked, and about the two persons.
 Thereupon all were silent and smiled; but the father made answer:
 'Thou knowest no one, my friend, I believe, but Adam and Eve?'
 No one restrained himself longer, but loud laughed out then the maidens,
 Loud laughed out the boys, the old man held his sides for his laughing.
 I, in embarrassment, dropped my hat, and the giggling continued,
 On and on and on, for all they kept playing and singing.
 Back to the house here I hurried, o'ercome with shame and vexation,
 Hung up my coat in the closet, and pulled out the curls with my fingers,
 Swearing that never again my foot should cross over that threshold.
 And I was perfectly right; for vain are the maidens, and heartless.
 E'en to this day, as I hear, I am called by them ever 'Tamino.'"

