But the father was silent. Then hastily rose the good pastor,
 Took up the word and said: "The moment alone is decisive;
 Fixes the life of man, and his future destiny settles.
 After long taking of counsel, yet only the work of a moment
 Every decision must be; and the wise alone seizes the right one.
 Dangerous always it is comparing the one with the other
 When we are making our choice, and so confusing our feelings.
 Hermann is pure. From childhood up I have known him, and never
 E'en as a boy was he wont to be reaching for this and the other:
 What he desired was best for him too, and he held to it firmly.
 Be not surprised and alarmed that now has appeared of a sudden,
 What thou hast wished for so long. It is true that the present appearance
 Bears not the form of the wish, exactly as thou hadst conceived it:
 For our wishes oft hide from ourselves the object we wish for;
 Gifts come down from above in the shapes appointed by Heaven.
 Therefore misjudge not the maiden who now of thy dearly beloved,
 Good and intelligent son has been first to touch the affections:
 Happy to whom at once his first love's hand shall be given,
 And in whose heart no tenderest wish must secretly languish.
 Yes: his whole bearing assures me that now his fate is decided.
 Genuine love matures in a moment the youth into manhood;
 He is not easily moved; and I fear that if this be refused him,
 Sadly his years will go by, those years that should be the fairest,"

 Straightway then in a thoughtful tone the doctor made answer,
 On whose tongue for a long time past the words had been trembling:
 "Pray let us here as before pursue the safe middle course only.
 Make haste slowly: that was Augustus the emperor's motto.
 Willingly I myself place at my well-beloved neighbor's disposal,
 Ready to do him what service I can with my poor understanding.
 Youth most especially stands in need of some one to guide it.
 Let me therefore go forth that I may examine the maiden,
 And may question the people among whom she lives and who know her.
 Me 'tis not easy to cheat: I know how words should be valued."

 Straightway the son broke in, and with wing'ed words made he answer:
 "Do so, neighbor, and go and make thine inquiries; but with thee
 I should be glad if our minister here were joined in the errand:
 Two such excellent men would be irreproachable judges.
 O my father! believe me, she's none of those wandering maidens,
 Not one of those who stroll through the land in search of adventure,
 And who seek to ensnare inexperienced youth in their meshes.
 No: the hard fortunes of war, that universal destroyer,
 Which is convulsing the earth and has hurled from its deep foundations
 Many a structure already, have sent the poor girl into exile.
 Are not now men of high birth, the most noble, in misery roaming?
 Princes fly in disguise and kings are in banishment living.
 So alas! also is she, the best among all of her sisters,
 Driven an exile from home; yet, her personal sorrows forgetting,
 She is devoted to others; herself without help, she is helpful.
 Great is the want and the suffering over the earth that are spreading:
 Shall not some happiness, too, be begotten of all this affliction,
 And shall not I in the arms of my wife, my trusted companion,
 Look back with joy to the war, as do ye to the great conflagration?"

 Outspoke the father then in a tone of decision, and answered:
 "Strangely thy tongue has been loosened, my son, which many a year past
 Seemed to have stuck in thy mouth, and only to move on compulsion!
 I must experience to-day, it would seem, what threatens all fathers,
 That the son's headstrong will the mother with readiness favors,
 Showing too easy indulgence; and every neighbor sides with them
 When there is aught to be carried against the father and husband.
 But I will not oppose you, thus banded together: how could I?
 For I already perceive here tears and defiance beforehand.
 Go ye therefore, inquire, in God's name, bring me the daughter.
 But if not so, then the boy is to think no more of the maiden."

 Thus the father. The son cried out with joyful demeanor,
 "Ere it is evening the noblest of daughters shall hither be brought you,
 Such as no man with sound sense in his breast can fail to be pleased with.
 Happy, I venture to hope, will be also the excellent maiden.
 Yes; she will ever be grateful for having had father and mother
 Given once more in you, and such as a child most delights in.
 Now I will tarry no longer, but straightway harness the horses,
 Drive forth our friends at once on the footsteps of my beloved,
 Leaving them then to act for themselves, as their wisdom shall dictate,
 Guide myself wholly, I promise, according to what they determine,
 And, until I may call her my own, ne'er look on the maiden."
 Thus he went forth: the others meanwhile remained in discussion,
 Rapid and earnest, considering deeply their great undertaking.

 Hermann hasted straightway to the stable, where quietly standing
 Found he the spirited stallions, the clean oats quickly devouring,
 And the well-dried hay that was cut from the richest of meadows.
 On them without delay the shining bits he adjusted,
 Hastily drew the straps through the buckles of beautiful plating,
 Firmly fastened then the long broad reins, and the horses
 Led without to the court-yard, whither the willing assistant
 Had with ease, by the pole, already drawn forward the carriage.
 Next to the whipple-tree they with care by the neatly kept traces
 Joined the impetuous strength of the freely travelling horses.
 Whip in hand took Hermann his seat and drove under the doorway.
 Soon as the friends straightway their commodious places had taken,
 Quickly the carriage rolled off, and left the pavement behind it,
 Left behind it the walls of the town and the fresh-whitened towers.
 Thus drove Hermann on till he came to the well-known causeway.
 Rapidly, loitering nowhere, but hastening up hill and down hill.
 But as he now before him perceived the spire of the village,
 And no longer remote the garden-girt houses were lying,
 Then in himself he thought that here he would rein up the horses.

 Under the solemn shade of lofty linden-trees lying,
 Which for centuries past upon this spot had been rooted,
 Spread in front of the village a broad and grass-covered common,
 Favorite place of resort for the peasants and neighboring townsfolk.
 Here, at the foot of the trees, sunk deep in the ground was a well-spring;
 When you descended the steps, stone benches you found at the bottom,
 Stationed about the spring, whose pure, living waters were bubbling
 Ceaselessly forth, hemmed in by low walls for convenience of drawing.
 Hermann resolved that here he would halt, with his horses and carriage,
 Under the shade of the trees. He did so, and said to the others;
 "Here alight, my friends, and go your ways to discover
 Whether the maiden in truth be worthy the hand that I offer.
 That, she is so, I believe; naught new or strange will ye tell me.
 Had I to act for myself, I should go with speed to the village,
 Where a few words from the maiden's own lips should determine my fortune.
 Ye will with readiness single her out from all of the others,
 For there can scarcely be one that to her may be likened in bearing.
 But I will give you, besides, her modest attire for a token:
 Mark, then, the stomacher's scarlet, that sets off the arch of her bosom,
 Prettily laced, and the bodice of black fitting close to her figure;
 Neatly the edge of her kerchief is plaited into a ruffle,
 Which with a simple grace her chin's rounded outline encircles;
 Freely and lightly rises above it the head's dainty oval;
 And her luxuriant hair over silver bodkins is braided;
 Down from under her bodice, the full, blue petticoat falling,
 Wraps itself, when she is walking, about her neatly shaped ankles.
 Yet one thing will I say, and would make it my earnest petition,--
 Speak not yourselves with the maiden, nor let your intent be discovered;
 Rather inquire of others, and hearken to what they may tell you.
 When ye have tidings enough to satisfy father and mother,
 Then return to me here, and we will consider what further.
 So did I plan it all out in my mind while driving you hither."

