 K. now
realised that all this time he had been hoping the painter would
suddenly go over to the window and pull it open.  He had prepared
himself even for the fog that he would breathe in through his open
mouth.  The thought that here he was entirely cut off from the air made
him feel dizzy.  He tapped lightly on the bedspread beside him and, with
a weak voice, said, "That is very inconvenient and unhealthy."  "Oh no,"
said the painter in defence of his window, "as it can't be opened this
room retains the heat better than if the window were double glazed, even
though it's only a single pane.  There's not much need to air the room
as there's so much ventilation through the gaps in the wood, but when I
do want to I can open one of my doors, or even both of them."  K. was
slightly consoled by this explanation and looked around to see where the
second door was.  The painter saw him do so and said, "It's behind you,
I had to hide it behind the bed."  Only then was K. able to see the
little door in the wall.  "It's really much too small for a studio
here," said the painter, as if he wanted to anticipate an objection K.
would make.  "I had to arrange things as well as I could.  That's
obviously a very bad place for the bed, in front of the door.  For
instance when the judge I'm painting at present comes he always comes
through the door by the bed, and I've even given him a key to this door
so that he can wait for me here in the studio when I'm not home.
Although nowadays he usually comes early in the morning when I'm still
asleep.  And of course, it always wakes me up when I hear the door
opened beside the bed, however fast asleep I am.  If you could hear the
way I curse him as he climbs over my bed in the morning you'd lose all
respect for judges.  I suppose I could take the key away from him but
that'd only make things worse.  It only takes a tiny effort to break any
of the doors here off their hinges."  All the time the painter was
speaking, K. was considering whether he should take off his coat, but he
finally realised that, if he didn't do so, he would be quite unable to
stay here any longer, so he took off his frock coat and lay it on his
knee so that he could put it back on again as soon as the conversation
was over.  He had hardly done this when one of the girls called out,
"Now he's taken his coat off!" and they could all be heard pressing
around the gaps in the planks to see the spectacle for themselves.  "The
girls think I'm going to paint your portrait," said the painter, "and
that's why you're taking your coat off."  "I see," said K., only
slightly amused by this, as he felt little better than he had before
even though he now sat in his shirtsleeves.  With some irritation he
asked, "What did you say the two other possibilities were?"  He had
already forgotten the terms used.  "Apparent acquittal and deferment,"
said the painter.  "It's up to you which one you choose.  You can get
either of them if I help you, but it'll take some effort of course, the
difference between them is that apparent acquittal needs concentrated
effort for a while and that deferment takes much less effort but it has
to be sustained.  Now then, apparent acquittal.  If that's what you want
I'll write down an assertion of your innocence on a piece of paper.  The
text for an assertion of this sort was passed down to me from my father
and it's quite unassailable.  I take this assertion round to the judges
I know.  So I'll start off with the one I'm currently painting, and put
the assertion to him when he comes for his sitting this evening.  I'll
lay the assertion in front of him, explain that you're innocent and give
him my personal guarantee of it.  And that's not just a superficial
guarantee, it's a real one and it's binding."  The painter's eyes seemed
to show some reproach of K. for wanting to impose that sort of
responsibility on him.  "That would be very kind of you", said K.  "And
would the judge then believe you and nonetheless not pass an absolute
acquittal?"  "It's like I just said," answered the painter.  "And
anyway, it's not entirely sure that all the judges would believe me,
many of them, for instance, might want me to bring you to see them
personally.  So then you'd have to come along too.  But at least then,
if that happens, the matter is half way won, especially as I'd teach you
in advance exactly how you'd need to act with the judge concerned, of
course.  What also happens, though, is that there are some judges who'll
turn me down in advance, and that's worse.  I'll certainly make several
attempts, but still, we'll have to forget about them, but at least we
can afford to do that as no one judge can pass the decisive verdict.
Then when I've got enough judges' signatures on this document I take it
to the judge who's concerned with your case.  I might even have his
signature already, in which case things develop a bit quicker than they
would do otherwise.  But there aren't usually many hold ups from then
on, and that's the time that the defendant can feel most confident.
It's odd, but true, that people feel more confidence in this time than
they do after they've been acquitted.  There's no particular exertion
needed now.  When he has the document asserting the defendant's
innocence, guaranteed by a number of other judges, the judge can acquit
you without any worries, and although there are still several
formalities to be gone through there's no doubt that that's what he'll
do as a favour to me and several other acquaintances.  You, however,
walk out the court and you're free."  "So, then I'll be free," said K.,
hesitantly.  "That's right," said the painter, "but only apparently free
or, to put it a better way, temporarily free, as the most junior judges,
the ones I know, they don't have the right to give the final acquittal.
Only the highest judge can do that, in the court that's quite out of reach
for you, for me and for all of us.  We don't know how things look there
and, incidentally, we don't want to know.   The right to acquit people
is a major privilege and our judges don't have it, but they do have the
right to free people from the indictment.  That's to say, if they're
freed in this way then for the time being the charge is withdrawn but
it's still hanging over their heads and it only takes an order from
higher up to bring it back into force.  And as I'm in such good contact
with the court I can also tell you how the difference between absolute
and apparent acquittal is described, just in a superficial way, in the
directives to the court offices.  If there's an absolute acquittal all
proceedings should stop, everything disappears from the process, not
just the indictment but the trial and even the acquittal disappears,
everything just disappears.  With an apparent acquittal it's different.
When that happens, nothing has changed except that the case for your
innocence, for your acquittal and the grounds for the acquittal have
been made stronger.  Apart from that, proceedings go on as before, the
court offices continue their business and the case gets passed to higher
courts, gets passed back down to the lower courts and so on, backwards
and forwards, sometimes faster, sometimes slower, to and fro.  It's
impossible to know exactly what's happening while this is going on.
Seen from outside it can sometimes seem that everything has been long
since forgotten, the documents have been lost and the acquittal is
complete.  No-one familiar with the court would believe it.  No
documents ever get lost, the court forgets nothing.   One day - no-one
expects it - some judge or other picks up the documents and looks more
closely at them, he notices that this particular case is still active,
and orders the defendant's immediate arrest.  I've been talking here as
if there's a long delay between apparent acquittal and re-arrest, that
is quite possible and I do know of cases like that, but it's just as
likely that the defendant goes home after he's been acquitted and finds
somebody there waiting to re-arrest him.  Then, of course, his life as a
free man is at an end."  "And does the trial start over again?" asked
K., finding it hard to believe.  "The trial will always start over
again," said the painter, "but there is, once again as before, the
possibility of getting an apparent acquittal.  Once again, the accused
has to muster all his strength and mustn't give up."  The painter said
that last phrase possibly as a result of the impression that K., whose
shoulders had dropped somewhat, gave on him.  "But to get a second
acquittal," asked K., as if in anticipation of further revelations by
the painter, "is that not harder to get than the first time?"  "As far
as that's concerned," answered the painter, "there's nothing you can say
for certain.
