        She suddenly interrupted herself and lay her hand on K.'s as if
she wanted to calm him down, and whispered, "Be quiet, Berthold is
watching us."  K. slowly looked up.  In the doorway to the courtroom
stood a young man, he was short, his legs were not quite straight, and
he continually moved his finger round in a short, thin, red beard with
which he hoped to make himself look dignified.  K. looked at him with
some curiosity, he was the first student he had ever met of the
unfamiliar discipline of jurisprudence, face to face at least, a man who
would even most likely attain high office one day.  The student, in
contrast, seemed to take no notice of K. at all, he merely withdrew his
finger from his beard long enough to beckon to the woman and went over
to the window, the woman leant over to K. and whispered, "Don't be cross
with me, please don't, and please don't think ill of me either, I've got
to go to him now, to this horrible man, just look at his bent legs.  But
I'll come straight back and then I'll go with you if you'll take me,
I'll go wherever you want, you can do whatever you like with me, I'll be
happy if I can be away from here for as long as possible, it'd be best
if I could get away from here for good."  She stroked K.'s hand once
more, jumped up and ran over to the window.  Before he realised it, K.
grasped for her hand but failed to catch it.   He really was attracted
to the woman, and even after thinking hard about it could find no good
reason why he should not give in to her allure.  It briefly crossed his
mind that the woman meant to entrap him on behalf of the court, but that
was an objection he had no difficulty in fending off.  In what way could
she entrap him?  Was he not still free, so free that he could crush the
entire court whenever he wanted, as least where it concerned him?  Could
he not have that much confidence in himself?  And her offer of help
sounded sincere, and maybe it wasn't quite worthless.  And maybe there
was no better revenge against the examining judge and his cronies than
to take this woman from him and have her for himself.  Maybe then, after
much hard work writing dishonest reports about K., the judge would go to
the woman's bed late one night and find it empty.  And it would be empty
because she belonged to K., because this woman at the window, this lush,
supple, warm body in its sombre clothes of rough, heavy material
belonged to him, totally to him and to him alone.  Once he had settled
his thoughts towards the woman in this way, he began to find the quiet
conversation at the window was taking too long, he rapped on the podium
with his knuckles, and then even with his fist.  The student briefly
looked away from the woman to glance at K. over his shoulder but did
allow himself to be disturbed, in fact he even pressed himself close to
the woman and put his arms around her.  She dropped her head down low as
if listening to him carefully, as she did so he kissed her right on the
neck, hardly even interrupting what he was saying.   K. saw this as
confirmation of the tyranny the student held over the woman and which
she had already complained about, he stood up and walked up and down the
room.  Glancing sideways at the student, he wondered what would be the
quickest possible way to get rid of him, and so it was not unwelcome to
him when the student, clearly disturbed by K.'s to-ing and fro-ing which
K. had now developed into a stamping up and down, said to him,
"You don't have to stay here, you know, if you're getting impatient.
You could have gone earlier, no-one would have missed you.  In fact you
should have gone, you should have left as quickly as possible as soon as
I got here."  This comment could have caused all possible rage to break
out between them, but K. also bore in mind that this was a prospective
court official speaking to a disfavoured defendant, and he might well
have been taking pride in speaking in this way.  K. remained standing
quite close to him and said with a smile, "You're quite right, I am
impatient, but the easiest way to settle this impatience would be if you
left us.  On the other hand, if you've come here to study - you are a
student, I hear - I'll be quite happy to leave the room to you and go
away with the woman.  I'm sure you'll still have a lot of study to do
before you're made into a judge.  It's true that I'm still not all that
familiar with your branch of jurisprudence but I take it it involves a
lot more than speaking roughly - and I see you have no shame in doing
that extremely well."  "He shouldn't have been allowed to move about so
freely," said the student, as if he wanted to give the woman an
explanation for K.'s insults, "that was a mistake.  I've told the
examining judge so.  He should at least have been detained in his room
between hearings.  Sometimes it's impossible to understand what the
judge thinks he's doing."
"You're wasting your breath," said K., then he reached his hand out
towards the woman and said, "come with me."  "So that's it," said the
student, "oh no, you're not going to get her," and with a strength you
would not have expected from him, he glanced tenderly at her, lifted her
up on one arm and, his back bent under the weight, ran with her to the
door.  In this way he showed, unmistakeably, that he was to some extent
afraid of K., but he nonetheless dared to provoke him still further by
stroking and squeezing the woman's arm with his free hand.  K. ran the
few steps up to him, but when he had reached him and was about to take
hold of him and, if necessary, throttle him, the woman said, "It's no
good, it's the examining judge who's sent for me, I daren't go with you,
this little bastard..." and here she ran her hand over the student's
face, "this little bastard won't let me."  "And you don't want to be set
free!" shouted K., laying his hand on the student's shoulder, who then
snapped at it with his teeth.  "No!" shouted the woman, pushing K. away
with both hands, "no, no don't do that, what d'you think you're doing!?
That'd be the end of me.  Let go of him, please just let go of him.
He's only carrying out the judge's orders, he's carrying me to him."
"Let him take you then, and I want to see nothing more of you," said K.,
enraged by his disappointment and giving the student a thump in the back
so that he briefly stumbled and then, glad that he had not fallen,
immediately jumped up all the higher with his burden.  K. followed them
slowly.  He realised that this was the first unambiguous setback he had
suffered from these people.  It was of course nothing to worry about, he
accepted the setback only because he was looking for a fight.  If he
stayed at home and carried on with his normal life he would be a
thousand times superior to these people and could get any of them out of
his way just with a kick.  And he imagined the most laughable scene
possible as an example of this, if this contemptible student, this
inflated child, this knock-kneed redbeard, if he were kneeling at Elsa's
bed wringing his hands and begging for forgiveness.  K. so enjoyed
imagining this scene that he decided to take the student along to Elsa
with him if ever he should get the opportunity.

