      Meanwhile, K. had been looking round the room, if it had not been
pointed out it would never have occurred to him that this wretched
little room could be called a studio.  It was hardly long enough or
broad enough to make two steps.  Everything, floor, walls and ceiling,
was made of wood, between the planks narrow gaps could be seen.  Across
from where K. was, the bed stood against the wall under a covering of
many different colours.  In the middle of the room a picture stood on an
easel, covered over with a shirt whose arms dangled down to the ground.
Behind K. was the window through which the fog made it impossible to see
further than the snow covered roof of the neighbouring building.

        The turning of the key in the lock reminded K. that he had not
wanted to stay too long.  So he drew the manufacturer's letter out from
his pocket, held it out to the painter and said, "I learned about you
from this gentleman, an acquaintance of yours, and it's on  his advice
that I've come here".  The painter glanced through the letter and threw
it down onto the bed.  If the manufacturer had not said very clearly
that Titorelli was an acquaintance of his, a poor man who was dependent
on his charity, then it would really have been quite possible to believe
that Titorelli did not know him or at least that he could not remember
him.  This impression was augmented by the painter's asking, "Were you
wanting to buy some pictures or did you want to have yourself painted?"
K. looked at the painter in astonishment.  What did the letter actually
say?  K. had taken it as a matter of course that the manufacturer had
explained to the painter in his letter that K. wanted nothing more with
him than to find out more about his trial.  He had been far too rash in
coming here!  But now he had to give the painter some sort of answer
and, glancing at the easel, said, "Are you working on a picture
currently?"  "Yes," said the painter, and he took the shirt hanging over
the easel and threw it onto the bed after the letter.  "It's a portrait.
Quite a good piece of work, although it's not quite finished yet."  This
was a convenient coincidence for K., it gave him a good opportunity to
talk about the court as the picture showed, very clearly, a judge.
What's more, it was remarkably similar to the picture in the lawyer's
office, although this one showed a quite different judge, a heavy man
with a full beard which was black and bushy and extended to the sides
far up the man's cheeks.  The lawyer's picture was also an oil painting,
whereas this one had been made with pastel colours and was pale and
unclear.  But everything else about the picture was similar, as this
judge, too, was holding tightly to the arm of his throne and seemed
ominously about to rise from it.  At first K. was about to say, "He
certainly is a judge," but he held himself back for the time being and
went closer to the picture as if he wanted to study it in detail.  There
was a large figure shown in middle of the throne's back rest which K.
could not understand and asked the painter about it.  That'll need some
more work done on it, the painter told him, and taking a pastel crayon
from a small table he added a few strokes to the edges of the figure but
without making it any clearer as far as K. could make out.  "That's the
figure of justice," said the painter, finally.  "Now I see," said K.,
"here's the blindfold and here are the scales.  But aren't those wings
on her heels, and isn't she moving?"  "Yes," said the painter, "I had to
paint it like that according to the contract.  It's actually the figure
of justice and the goddess of victory all in one."  "That is not a good
combination," said K. with a smile.  "Justice needs to remain still,
otherwise the scales will move about and it won't be possible to make a
just verdict."  "I'm just doing what the client wanted," said the
painter.  "Yes, certainly," said K., who had not meant to criticise
anyone by that comment.  "You've painted the figure as it actually
appears on the throne."  "No,"  said the painter, "I've never seen that
figure or that throne, it's all just invention, but they told me what it
was I had to paint."  "How's that?" asked K. pretending not fully to
understand what the painter said.  "That is a judge sitting on the
judge's chair, isn't it?"  "Yes," said the painter, "but that judge
isn't very high up and he's never sat on any throne like that."  "And he
has himself painted in such a grand pose?  He's sitting there just like
the president of the court."  "Yeah, gentlemen like this are very vain,"
said the painter.  "But they have permission from higher up to get
themselves painted like this.  It's laid down quite strictly just what
sort of portrait each of them can get for himself.  Only it's a pity
that you can't make out the details of his costume and pose in this
picture, pastel colours aren't really suitable for showing people like
this."  "Yes," said K., "it does seem odd that it's in pastel colours."
"That's what the judge wanted," said the painter, "it's meant to be for
a woman."  The sight of the picture seemed to make him feel like
working, he rolled up his shirtsleeves, picked up a few of the crayons,
and K. watched as a reddish shadow built up around the head of the judge
under their quivering tips and radiated out the to edges of the picture.
This shadow play slowly surrounded the head like a decoration or lofty
distinction.  But around the figure of Justice, apart from some
coloration that was barely noticeable, it remained light, and in this
brightness the figure seemed to shine forward so that it now looked like
neither the God of Justice nor the God of Victory, it seemed now,
rather, to be a perfect depiction of the God of the Hunt.  K. found the
painter's work more engrossing than he had wanted; but finally he
reproached himself for staying so long without having done anything
relevant to his own affair.  "What's the name of this judge?" he asked
suddenly.  "I'm not allowed to tell you that," the painter answered.  He
was bent deeply over the picture and clearly neglecting his guest who,
at first, he had received with such care.  K. took this to be just a
foible of the painter's, and it irritated him as it made him lose time.
"I take it you must be a trustee of the court," he said.  The painter
immediately put his crayons down, stood upright, rubbed his hands
together and looked at K. with a smile.  "Always straight out with the
truth," he said. "You want to learn something about the court, like it
says in your letter of recommendation, but then you start talking about
my pictures to get me on your side.  Still, I won't hold it against you,
you weren't to know that that was entirely the wrong thing to try with
me. Oh, please!" he said sharply, repelling K.'s attempt to make some
objection.  He then continued, "And besides, you're quite right in your
comment that I'm a trustee of the court."  He made a pause, as if
wanting to give K. the time to come to terms with this fact.  The girls
could once more be heard from behind the door.  They were probably
pressed around the keyhole, perhaps they could even see into the room
through the gaps in the planks.  K. forewent the opportunity to excuse
himself in some way as he did not wish to distract the painter from what
he was saying, or else perhaps he didn't want him to get too far above
himself and in this way make himself to some extent unattainable, so he
asked, "Is that a publicly acknowledged position?"  "No," was the
painter's curt reply, as if the question prevented him saying any more.
But K. wanted him to continue speaking and said, "Well, positions like
that, that aren't officially acknowledged, can often have more influence
than those that are."  "And that's how it is with me," said the painter,
and nodded with a frown.  "I was talking about your case with the
manufacturer yesterday, and he asked me if I wouldn't like to help you,
and I answered: 'He can come and see me if he likes', and now I'm
pleased to see you here so soon.  This business seems to be quite
important to you, and, of course, I'm not surprised at that.  Would you
not like to take your coat off now?"  K. had intended to stay for only a
very short time, but the painter's invitation was nonetheless very
welcome.  The air in the room had slowly become quite oppressive for
him, he had several times looked in amazement at a small, iron stove in
the corner that certainly could not have been lit, the heat of the room
was inexplicable.  As he took off his winter overcoat and also
unbuttoned his frock coat the painter said to him in apology, "I must
have warmth.  And it is very cosy here, isn't it.  This room's very good
in that respect."  K. made no reply, but it was actually not the heat
that made him uncomfortable but, much more, the stuffiness, the air that
almost made it more difficult to breathe, the room had probably not been
ventilated for a long time.  The unpleasantness of this was made all the
stronger for K. when the painter invited him to sit on the bed while he
himself sat down on the only chair in the room in front of the easel.
The painter even seemed to misunderstand why K. remained at the edge of
the bed and urged K. to make himself comfortable, and as he hesitated he
went over to the bed himself and pressed K. deep down into the
bedclothes and pillows.  Then he went back to his seat and at last he
asked his first objective question, which made K. forget everything
else.  "You're innocent, are you?" he asked.  "Yes," said K.  He felt a
simple joy at answering this question, especially as the answer was
given to a private individual and therefore would have no consequences.
Up till then no-one had asked him this question so openly.  To make the
most of his pleasure he added, "I am totally innocent."  "So," said the
painter, and he lowered his head and seemed to be thinking.  Suddenly he
raised his head again and said, "Well if you're innocent it's all very
simple."  K. began to scowl, this supposed trustee of the court was
talking like an ignorant child.
