
        K. didn't concern himself long with the guard or these people,
especially as he saw a turning off the corridor, about half way along it
on the right hand side, where there was no door to stop him going that
way.  He asked the usher whether that was the right way to go, the usher
nodded, and that is the way that K. went.  The usher remained always one
or two steps behind K, which he found irritating as in a place like this
it could give the impression that he was being driven along by someone
who had arrested him, so he frequently waited for the usher to catch up,
but the usher always remained behind him.  In order to put an end to his
discomfort, K. finally said, "Now that I've seen what it looks like
here, I'd like to go."  "You haven't seen everything yet," said the
usher ingenuously.
"I don't want to see everything," said K., who was also feeling very
tired, "I want to go, what is the way to the exit?"  "You haven't got
lost, have you?" asked the usher in amazement, "you go down this way to
the corner, then right down the corridor straight ahead as far as the
door."  "Come with me," said K., "show me the way, I'll miss it, there
are so many different ways here."  "It's the only way there is," said
the usher, who had now started to sound quite reproachful, "I can't go
back with you again, I've got to hand in my report, and I've already
lost a lot of time because of you as it is."  "Come with me!" K.
repeated, now somewhat sharper as if he had finally caught the usher out
in a lie.  "Don't shout like that," whispered the usher, "there's
offices all round us here.  If you don't want to go back by yourself
come on a bit further with me or else wait here till I've sorted out my
report, then I'll be glad to go back with you again."  "No, no," said
K., "I will not wait and you must come with me now."  K. had still not
looked round at anything at all in the room where he found himself, and
it was only when one of the many wooden doors all around him opened that
he noticed it.  A young woman, probably summoned by the loudness of K.'s
voice, entered and asked, "What is it the gentleman wants?"  In the
darkness behind her there was also a man approaching.  K. looked at the
usher.  He had, after all, said that no-one would take any notice of K.,
and now there were two people coming, it only needed a few and everyone
in the office would become aware of him and asking for explanations as
to why he was there.  The only understandable and acceptable thing to
say was that he was accused of something and wanted to know the date of
his next hearing, but this was an explanation he did not want to give,
especially as it was not true - he had only come out of curiosity.  Or
else, an explanation even less usable, he could say that he wanted to
ascertain that the court was as revolting on the inside as it was on the
outside.  And it did seem that he had been quite right in this
supposition, he had no wish to intrude any deeper, he was disturbed
enough by what he had seen already, he was not in the right frame of
mind just then to face a high official such as might appear from behind
any door, and he wanted to go, either with the usher of the court or, if
needs be, alone.

        But he must have seemed very odd standing there in silence, and
the young woman and the usher were indeed looking at him as if they
thought he would go through some major metamorphosis any second which
they didn't want to miss seeing.  And in the doorway stood the man whom
K. had noticed in the background earlier, he held firmly on to the beam
above the low door swinging a little on the tips of his feet as if
becoming impatient as he watched.  But the young woman was the first to
recognise that K.'s behaviour was caused by his feeling slightly unwell,
she brought a chair and asked,
"Would you not like to sit down?"  K. sat down immediately and, in order
to keep his place better, put his elbows on the armrests.  "You're a
little bit dizzy, aren't you?" she asked him.  Her face was now close in
front of him, it bore the severe expression that many young women have
just when they're in the bloom of their youth.  "It's nothing for you to
worry about," she said, "that's nothing unusual here, almost everyone
gets an attack like that the first time they come here.  This is your
first time is it?  Yes, it's nothing unusual then.  The sun burns down
on the roof and the hot wood makes the air so thick and heavy.  It makes
this place rather unsuitable for offices, whatever other advantages it
might offer.  But the air is almost impossible to breathe on days when
there's a lot of business, and that's almost every day.  And when you
think that there's a lot of washing put out to dry here as well - and we
can't stop the tenants doing that - it's not surprising you started to
feel unwell.  But you get used to the air alright in the end.  When
you're here for the second or third time you'll hardly notice how
oppressive the air is.  Are you feeling any better now?"  K. made no
answer, he felt too embarrassed at being put at the mercy of these
people by his sudden weakness, and learning the reason for feeling ill
made him feel not better but a little worse.  The girl noticed it
straight away, and to make the air fresher for K., she took a window
pole that was leaning against the wall and pushed open a small hatch
directly above K.'s head that led to the outside.  But so much soot fell
in that the girl had to immediately close the hatch again and clean the
soot off K.'s hands with her handkerchief, as K. was too tired to do
that for himself.  He would have liked just to sit quietly where he was
until he had enough strength to leave, and the less fuss people made
about him the sooner that would be.  But then the girl said, "You can't
stay here, we're in people's way here ..."  K. looked at her as if to
ask whose way they were impeding.  "If you like, I can take you to the
sick room," and turning to the man in the doorway said, "please help
me".  The man immediately came over to them, but K. did not want to go
to the sick room, that was just what he wanted to avoid, being led
further from place to place, the further he went the more difficult it
must become.  So he said, "I am able to walk now," and stood up, shaking
after becoming used to sitting so comfortably.  But then he was unable
to stay upright. "I can't manage it," he said shaking his head, and sat
down again with a sigh.  He remembered the usher who, despite
everything, would have been able to lead him out of there but who seemed
to have gone long before.  K. looked out between the man and the young
woman who were standing in front of him but was unable to find the
usher.  "I think," said the man, who was elegantly dressed and whose
appearance was made especially impressive with a grey waistcoat that had
two long, sharply tailored points, "the gentleman is feeling unwell
because of the atmosphere here, so the best thing, and what he would
most prefer, would be not to take him to the sick room but get him out
of the offices altogether."  "That's right," exclaimed K., with such joy
that he nearly interrupted what the man was saying, "I'm sure that'll
make me feel better straight away, I'm really not that weak, all I need
is a little support under my arms, I won't cause you much trouble, it's
not such a long way anyway, lead me to the door and then I'll sit on the
stairs for a while and soon recover, as I don't suffer from attacks like
this at all, I'm surprised at it myself.  I also work in an office and
I'm quite used to office air, but here it seems to be too strong, you've
said so yourselves.  So please, be so kind as to help me on my way a
little, I'm feeling dizzy, you see, and it'll make me ill if I stand up
by myself."  And with that he raised his shoulders to make it easier for
the two of them to take him by the arms.

