Having given his orders, Ivan Mironoff dismissed us. I went out with
Alexis, speculating on what we had heard. "What do you think of it? How
will this end?" I asked him.

"God knows," he replied, "we shall see. At present there is no danger."
And he began, as if thinking, to hum a French air.

Notwithstanding our precautions the news of the apparition of
Pougatcheff spread through the fortress. However great the respect of
Ivan Mironoff for his wife, he would not reveal to her for anything in
the world a military secret. When he had received the General's letter
he very adroitly rid himself of Basilia by telling her that the Greek
priest had received from Orenbourg extraordinary news which he kept a
great mystery. Thereupon Basilia desired to pay a visit to Accouline,
the clergyman's wife, and by Mironoff's advice Marie went also. Master
of the situation, Ivan Mironoff locked up the maid in the kitchen and
assembled us.

Basilia came home without news, and learned that during her absence a
council of war had been held, and that Polacca was imprisoned in
the kitchen. She suspected that her husband had deceived her, and
overwhelmed him with questions. He was prepared for the attack, and
stoutly replied to his curious better-half:

"You see, my dear, the women about the country have been using straw
to kindle their fires; now as that might be dangerous, I assembled my
officers, and gave them orders to prevent these women lighting fires
with anything but fagots and brushwood."

"And why did you lock up Polacca in the kitchen till my return?" Ivan
Mironoff had not foreseen that question, and muttered some incoherent
words. Basilia saw at once her husband's perfidy, but knowing that
she could extract nothing from him at that moment, she ceased her
questioning, and spoke of the pickled cucumbers which Accouline knew
how to prepare in a superior fashion. That night Basilia never closed an
eye, unable to imagine what it was that her husband knew that she could
not share with him.

The next day, returning from mass, she saw Ignatius cleaning the cannon,
taking out rags, pebbles, bits of wood, and all sorts of rubbish
which the small boys had stuffed there. "What means these warlike
preparations?" thought the Commandant's wife? "Is an attack from the
Kirghis feared? Is it possible that Mironoff would hide from me so
mere a trifle?" She called Ignatius, determined to know the secret that
excited her woman's curiosity. Basilia began by making some remarks
about household matters, like a judge who begins his interrogation with
questions foreign to the affair, in order to reassure the accused, and
throw him off his guard. Then having paused a moment she sighed and
shook her head, saying: "O God! what news! what news! What will become
of us?"

"My dear lady," said Ignatius, "the Lord is merciful; we have soldiers
and plenty of powder; I have cleaned the cannon. We may repulse this
Pougatcheff. If the Lord is with us, the wolf will eat no one here."

"Who is Pougatcheff?" asked the Commandant's wife.

Ignatius saw that he had gone too far, and he bit his tongue. But it was
too late. Basilia constrained him to tell her all, having given her word
to keep the secret. She kept her word, and indeed told no one except
Accoulina, whose cow was still on the steppe and might be carried off by
the brigands. Soon every one talked of Pougatcheff, the current reports
being very different. The Commandant sent out the Corporal to pick up
information about him in all the neighboring villages and little forts.
The Corporal returned after an absence of two days, and declared that
he had seen on the steppe, sixty versts from the fortress, a great many
fires, and that he had heard the Bashkirs say that an innumerable force
was advancing. He could not tell anything definitely, having been afraid
to venture farther.

Great agitation was soon after this observed amongst the Cossacks of
our garrison. They assembled in groups in the streets, speaking in a
low tone amongst themselves, and dispersing as soon as they perceived
a dragoon or other Russian soldier. Orders were given to watch them.
Zoulac, a baptized Kalmouk, made a very grave revelation to the
Commandant. According to the Kalmouk, the Cossack made a false report;
for to his comrades the perfidious Corporal said that he had advanced to
the rebel camp, had been presented to their rebel chief, had kissed his
hand and conversed with him. The Commandant ordered the Corporal under
arrest, and replaced him by the Kalmouk. This change was received by
the Cossacks with visible discontent. They openly murmured and Ignatius,
when executing the Commandant's order, heard them say, with his own
ears, "wait, garrison rat, wait!"


