"What's that?" cried Pugatchéf, whose eyes suddenly sparkled.

I confess I was in fear for my poor follower. He was about to embark on
new explanations when Pugatchéf interrupted him.

"How dare you bother me with such nonsense?" cried he, snatching the
paper out of the hands of the Secretary and throwing it in Savéliitch's
face. "Foolish old man, you have been despoiled; well, what does it
signify. But, old owl, you should eternally pray God for me and my lads
that you and your master do not swing up there with the other rebels. A
hareskin '_touloup!_' Hark ye, I'll have you flayed alive that
'_touloups_' may be made of your skin."

"As it may please you!" replied Savéliitch. "But I am not a free man,
and I must answer for my lord's goods."

Pugatchéf was apparently in a fit of high-mindedness. He turned aside
his head, and went off without another word. Chvabrine and the chiefs
followed him. All the band left the fort in order. The people escorted
it.

I remained alone in the square with Savéliitch. My follower held in his
hand the memorandum, and was contemplating it with an air of deep
regret. Seeing my friendly understanding with Pugatchéf, he had thought
to turn it to some account. But his wise hope did not succeed. I was
going to scold him sharply for his misplaced zeal, and I could not help
laughing.

"Laugh, sir, laugh," said Savéliitch; "but when you are obliged to fit
up your household anew, we shall see if you still feel disposed to
laugh."

I ran to the pope's house to see Marya Ivánofna. The pope's wife came to
meet me with a sad piece of news. During the night high fever had set
in, and the poor girl was now delirious. Akoulina Pamphilovna brought me
to her room. I gently approached the bed. I was struck by the frightful
change in her face. The sick girl did not know me. Motionless before
her, it was long ere I understood the words of Father Garasim and his
wife, who apparently were trying to comfort me.

Gloomy thoughts overwhelmed me. The position of a poor orphan left
solitary and friendless in the power of rascals filled me with fear,
while my own powerlessness equally distressed me; but Chvabrine,
Chvabrine above all, filled me with alarm. Invested with all power by
the usurper, and left master in the fort, with the unhappy girl, the
object of his hatred, he was capable of anything. What should I do? How
could I help her? How deliver her? Only in one way, and I embraced it.
It was to start with all speed for Orenburg, so as to hasten the
recapture of Bélogorsk, and to aid in it if possible.

I took leave of the pope and of Akoulina Pamphilovna, recommending
warmly to them her whom I already regarded as my wife. I seized the hand
of the young girl and covered it with tears and kisses.

"Good-bye," the pope's wife said to me, as she led me away. "Good-bye,
Petr' Andréjïtch; perhaps we may meet again in happier times. Don't
forget us, and write often to us. Except you, poor Marya Ivánofna has no
longer stay or comforter."


