Each man bragged of his prowess, proclaimed his opinions, and freely
contradicted Pugatchéf. And it was decided to march upon Orenburg, a
bold move, which was nearly crowned with success. The departure was
fixed for the day following.

The guests drank yet another bumper, rose from table, and took leave of
Pugatchéf. I wished to follow them, but Pugatchéf said--

"Stay there, I wish to speak to you!"

We remained alone together, and for a few moments neither spoke.

Pugatchéf looked sharply at me, winking from time to time his left eye
with an indefinable expression of slyness and mockery. At last he gave
way to a long burst of laughter, and that with such unfeigned gaiety
that I myself, regarding him, began to laugh without knowing why.

"Well, your lordship," said he, "confess you were afraid when my fellows
cast the rope about your neck. I warrant the sky seemed to you the size
of a sheepskin. And you would certainly have swung beneath the
cross-beam but for your old servant. I knew the old owl again directly.
Well, would you ever have thought, sir, that the man who guided you to a
lodging in the steppe was the great Tzar himself?" As he said these
words he assumed a grave and mysterious air. "You are very guilty as
regards me," resumed he, "but I have pardoned you on account of your
courage, and because you did me a good turn when I was obliged to hide
from my enemies. But you shall see better things; I will load you with
other favours when I shall have recovered my empire. Will you promise to
serve me zealously?"

The robber's question and his impudence appeared to be so absurd that I
could not restrain a smile.

"Why do you laugh?" he asked, frowning. "Do you not believe me to be the
great Tzar? Answer me frankly."

I did not know what to do. I could not recognize a vagabond as Emperor;
such conduct was to me unpardonably base. To call him an impostor to his
face was to devote myself to death; and the sacrifice for which I was
prepared on the gallows, before all the world, and in the first heat of
my indignation, appeared to me a useless piece of bravado. I knew not
what to say.

Pugatchéf awaited my reply in fierce silence. At last (and I yet recall
that moment with satisfaction) the feeling of duty triumphed in me over
human weakness, and I made reply to Pugatchéf--

"Just listen, and I will tell you the whole truth. You shall be judge.
Can I recognize in you a Tzar? You are a clever man; you would see
directly that I was lying."

"Who, then, am I, according to you?"

"God alone knows; but whoever you be, you are playing a dangerous game."

Pugatchéf cast at me a quick, keen glance.

"You do not then think that I am the Tzar Peter? Well, so let it be. Is
there no chance of success for the bold? In former times did not
Grischka Otrépieff[59] reign? Think of me as you please, but do not
leave me. What does it matter to you whether it be one or the other? He
who is pope is father. Serve me faithfully, and I will make you a
field-marshal and a prince. What do you say to this?"

"No," I replied, firmly. "I am a gentleman. I have sworn fidelity to Her
Majesty the Tzarina; I cannot serve you. If you really wish me well,
send me back to Orenburg."

Pugatchéf reflected.

"But if I send you away," said he, "will you promise me at least not to
bear arms against me?"

"How can you expect me to promise you that?" replied I. "You know
yourself that that does not depend upon me. If I be ordered to march
against you I must submit. You are a chief now--you wish your
subordinates to obey you. How can I refuse to serve if I am wanted? My
head is at your disposal; if you let me go free, I thank you; if you
cause me to die, may God judge you. Howbeit, I have told you the truth."

My outspoken candour pleased Pugatchéf.

"E'en so let it be," said he, clapping me on the shoulder; "either
entirely punish or entirely pardon. Go to the four winds and do what
seems good in your eyes, but come to-morrow and bid me good-bye; and now
begone to bed--I am sleepy myself."

I left Pugatchéf, and went out into the street. The night was still and
cold, the moon and stars, sparkling with all their brightness, lit up
the square and the gallows. All was quiet and dark in the rest of the
fort. Only in the tavern were lights still to be seen, and from within
arose the shouts of the lingering revellers.

I threw a glance at the pope's house. The doors and the shutters were
closed; all seemed perfectly quiet there. I went home and found
Savéliitch deploring my absence. The news of my regained liberty
overwhelmed him with joy.

"Thanks be to Thee, O Lord!" said he, making the sign of the cross. "We
will leave the fort to-morrow at break of day and we will go in God's
care. I have prepared something for you; eat, my father, and sleep till
morning quietly, as though in the pocket of Christ!"

I took his advice, and, after having supped with a good appetite, I went
to sleep on the bare boards, as weary in mind as in body.




