"Ah! what folly; you have had some words with Alexis. What then? A harsh
word can not be hung up by the neck. He gives you impertinence, give
him the same; if he give you a slap, return the blow; he a second, you
a third; in the end we will compel you to make peace. Whilst if you
fight--well, if _you_ should kill _him_, God be with him! for I do not
like him much; but if he should perforate you, what a nice piece of
business! Then who will pay for the broken pots?"

The arguments of the prudent officer did not shake my resolution.

"Do as you like," said Ignatius, "but what's the use of having me as a
witness? People fight--that's nothing extraordinary--I have often been
quite close to Swedes and Turks, and people of all shades of color."

I tried to explain to him the duties of a second; Ignatius would not, or
could not understand me. "Follow your own fashion," said he, "if I were
to meddle in this affair, it would be to announce to Ivan Mironoff,
according to rule, that a plot is being made in the fortress for the
commission of a criminal action--one contrary to the interests of the
crown."

I was alarmed, and begged Ignatius to say nothing to the Commandant. He
gave me his word that he would be silent, and I left him in peace. As
usual I passed the evening at the Commandant's, forcing myself to
be calm and gay, in order not to awaken suspicions and to avoid
questioning. I confess that I had not the coolness of which people boast
who have been in a similar position. I was disposed to tenderness. Marie
Mironoff seemed more attractive than ever. The idea that perhaps I saw
her for the last time, gave her a touching grace.

Alexis entered. I took him aside and told him of my conversation with
Ignatius.

"What's the good of seconds," said he, dryly. "We can do without them."

We agreed to fight behind the haystack the next morning at six o'clock.

Seeing us talking amicably, Ignatius, full of joy, nearly betrayed us.
"You should have done that long ago, for a bad peace is better than a
good quarrel."

"What! what! Ignatius," said the Captain's wife, who was playing
patience in a corner, "I do not quite understand?"

Ignatius, seeing my displeasure, remembered his promise, became confused
and knew not what to answer. Alexis came to his relief: "He approves of
peace."

"With whom had you quarreled?" said she.

"With Peter Grineff--a few high words."

"Why?"

"For a mere nothing--a song."

"Fine cause for a quarrel! a song! Tell me how it happened."

"Willingly: Peter has recently been composing, and this morning he sang
his song for me. Then I chanted mine:


