When I came to myself, I neither knew what had happened nor where I was.
I felt very weak; the room was strange, there was Saveliitch standing
before me, a light in his hand, and some one arranging the bandages that
bound my chest and shoulder. Gradually I recalled my duel, and easily
divined that I had been wounded. The door at this instant moaned gently
on its hinges.

"Well, how is he?" whispered a voice that made me start.

"Still in the same state," sighed Saveliitch, "now unconscious four
days." I wanted to turn on my bed, but I had not the strength. "Where
am I?" said I, with effort, "who is here?" Marie approached, and bending
over me said, gently, "How do you feel?"

"Thank God, I am well. Is that Marie? tell me--?" I could not finish.
Saveliitch uttered a cry of joy, his delight showing plainly in his
face. "He recovers! he recovers! Thanks to thee, O God! Peter, how you
frightened me!--four days! It is easy to talk--!"

Marie interrupted him: "Do not, Saveliitch, speak too much to him; he is
still very weak." She went out, shutting the door noiselessly. I must be
in the Commandant's house, or Marie could not come to see me. I wished
to question Saveliitch, but the old man shook his head and put his
fingers in his ears. I closed my eyes from ill-humor--and fell asleep.

Upon awaking, I called Saveliitch; instead of him, I saw before me
Marie, whose gentle voice greeted me. I seized her hand and bathed it
with my tears. Marie did not withdraw it, and suddenly I felt upon my
cheek the impression, humid and delicious, of her lips! A thrill shot
through my whole being.

"Dear, good Marie, be my wife, and make me the happiest of men!"

"In the name of heaven be calm," she said, withdrawing her hand, "your
wound may reopen; for my sake be careful."

She left the room. I was in a daze. I felt life returning. "She will be
mine!" I kept repeating, "she loves me!" I grew better, hour by hour.
The barber of the regiment dressed my wounds, for there was no other
physician in the fortress, and thank God, he did not merely play the
doctor. Youth and nature completed the cure.

The Commandant's whole family surrounded me with care. Marie scarcely
ever left me. I need not say that I took the first favorable moment to
continue my interrupted declaration. This time Marie listened with more
patience. She frankly acknowledged her affection for me. And added
that her parents would be happy in her happiness; "but," she continued,
"think well of it? Will there be no objection on the part of your
family?"

I did not doubt my mother's tenderness, but knowing my father's
character, I foresaw that my love would not be received by him
favorably, and that in all probability he would treat it as one of my
youthful follies. This I avowed plainly to Marie, but nevertheless I
resolved to write to my father as eloquently as possible, and ask his
blessing on our marriage. I showed the letter to Marie, who thought
it so touching and convincing that she did not doubt of success, and
abandoned herself, with all the confidence of youth and love, to the
feelings of her heart.

I made peace with Alexis in the first days of my convalescence. Ivan
Mironoff said, reproaching me for the duel: "You see, Peter, I ought
to put you under arrest, but indeed you have been well punished without
that. Alexis is, by my orders, under guard in the barn, and his sword is
under lock and key in Basilia's keeping."

I was too happy to harbor spite, so I entreated for Alexis, and the kind
Commandant, with his wife's permission, consented to set him at liberty.
Alexis came at once to see me. He expressed regret for all that had
happened, confessing that the fault was all his, and begged me to
forget the past. Being naturally incapable of revenge, I pardoned him,
forgiving both our quarrel and my wound. In his calumny I now saw the
irritation of wounded vanity and despised love. I generously forgave my
unfortunate rival. As soon as completely cured I returned to my lodging.
I awaited impatiently the reply to my letter, not daring to hope, yet
trying to stifle all sad presentiments. I had not yet had an explanation
with Basilia and her husband, but my suit could not surprise them.
Neither Marie nor I had concealed our feelings, and we were sure in
advance of their consent.


