"What's that, sir?" said the General, stupefied; "military tactics
present no other means; we must act either offensively or defensively."

"Your Excellency, act _subornatively_."

"Eh! eh! Your opinion is judicious," said the General; "subornative
acts--that is to say, indirect acts--are also admitted by the science
of tactics, and we will profit by your counsel. We might offer for the
rascal's head seventy or even a hundred roubles, to be taken out of the
secret funds."

"And then," interrupted the man in silk, "may I be a Kirghis ram,
instead of a College Director, if the thieves do not bring their chief
to you, chained hand and foot."

"We can think about it," said the General. "But let us, in any case,
take some military measures. Gentlemen, give your votes in legal order."

All the opinions were contrary to mine. All agreed, that it was better
to stay behind a strong stone wall, protected by cannon, than to tempt
fortune in the open field. Finally, when all the opinions were known,
the General shook the ashes from his pipe and pronounced the following
discourse:

"Gentlemen, I am of the Ensign's opinion, for it is according to the
science of military tactics, which always prefers offensive movements to
defensive." He stopped and stuffed the tobacco into his pipe. I glanced
exultingly at the civil service employes, who, with discontented looks,
were whispering to each other.

"But, gentlemen," continued he, giving out with a sigh a long puff of
smoke, "I dare not assume the responsibility. I go with the majority,
which has decided that we await in this city the threatened siege,
and repulse the enemy by the power of artillery, and if possible, by
well-directed sorties."

The council broke up. I could not but deplore the weakness of the worthy
soldier, who, contrary to his own convictions, decided to follow the
opinion of ignorant inexperience.

Some days after this famous council of war, Pougatcheff, true to his
word, approached Orenbourg. From the top of the city walls I made a
reconnaissance of the rebel army. It seemed to me that their number had
increased ten-fold. They had more artillery, taken from the small forts
captured by Pougatcheff. Remembering our council, I foresaw a long
captivity behind the walls of Orenbourg, and I was ready to cry with
chagrin. Far from me the intention of describing the siege of Orenbourg,
which belongs to history and not to family memoirs. Suffice it to say,
that this siege was disastrous to the inhabitants, who had to
suffer hunger and privations of every kind. Life at Orenbourg became
insupportable. The decision of fate was awaited with anguish. Food was
scarce; bombshells fell upon the defenseless houses of citizens. The
attacks of Pougatcheff made very little excitement. I was dying of
_ennui_. I had promised Accoulina that I would correspond with her, but
communication was cut off, and I could not send or receive a letter
from Belogorsk. My only pastime consisted in military sorties. Thanks
to Pougatcheff I had an excellent horse, and I shared my meager pittance
with it. I went out every day beyond the ramparts to skirmish with
Pougatcheff's advance guards. The rebels had the best of it; they
had plenty of food and were well mounted. Our poor cavalry were in no
condition to oppose them. Sometimes our half-starved infantry went
into the field; but the depth of the snow hindered them from acting
successfully against the flying cavalry of the enemy. The artillery
vainly thundered from the ramparts, and in the field it could not
advance, because of the weakness of our attenuated horses. This was our
way of making war; this is what the civil service employes of Orenbourg
called prudence and foresight.

One day when we had routed and driven before us quite a large troop, I
overtook a straggling Cossack; my Turkish sabre was uplifted to strike
him when he doffed his cap and cried out: "Good day, Peter, how fares
your health?"

I recognized our Corporal. I was delighted to see him.

"Good day, Maxim. How long since you left Belogorsk?"

"Not long, Peter. I came yesterday. I have a letter for you."

"Where is it?" I cried, delighted.

"Here," replied Maxim, putting his hand in his bosom. "I promised
Polacca to try and give it to you." He gave me a folded paper, and set
off on a gallop. I read with agitation the following lines:

"By the will of God I am deprived of my parents, and except you, Peter,
I know of no one who can protect me; Alexis commands in place of my late
father. He so terrified Father Garasim that I was obliged to go and live
at our house, where I am cruelly treated by Alexis. He will force me to
become his wife. He says he saved my life by not betraying the trick of
passing for the niece of Accoulina. I could rather die than be his wife.
I have three days to accept his offer; after that I need expect no
mercy from him. O, Peter! entreat your General to send us help, and if
possible, come yourself. MARIE MIRONOFF."

This letter nearly crazed me. I rushed back to the city, not sparing the
spur to my poor horse. A thousand projects flashed through my mind to
rescue her. Arrived in the city, I hurried to the General's and ran into
his room. He was walking up and down smoking his meerschaum. Seeing me
he stopped, alarmed at my abrupt entrance.

"Your Excellency, I come to you, as to my own father; do not refuse me;
the happiness of my life depends upon it."

"But what is it?" said the General; "what can I do for you?"

"Your Excellency, permit me to take a battalion of soldiers and half a
hundred Cossacks, to go and storm the fortress of Belogorsk."

"Storm the fortress?" said the General.

"I answer for the success of the attack, only let me go."

"No, young man," said he; "at so great a distance the enemy would easily
cut off all communication with the principal strategic point."

I was frightened by his military wisdom, and hastened to interrupt him:
"Captain Mironoff's daughter has written me, begging for relief. Alexis
threatens to compel her to be his wife!"

"Ah! Alexis, traitor! If he fall into my hands I shall try him in
twenty-four hours, and he shall be shot on the glacis of the fortress!
meantime patience."

"Patience!" I cried; "in the interval Marie will be compelled to obey
him."

"Oh," said the General, "that would not be a misfortune--it is better
that she should become the wife of Alexis, who can protect her. When we
shall have shot the traitor, then she will find a better husband."

"I would rather die," I said with fury, "than yield her to Alexis."

"I understand it all now," said the old man. "You are, no doubt, in love
yourself with Marie Mironoff. That's another thing. Poor boy! Still,
I can not give you a battalion and fifty Cossacks. The thing is
unreasonable." I hung my head in despair. But I had a plan of my own.



