Chvabrine came in. I took him aside and told him about my interview with
Iwán Ignatiitch.

"Why any seconds?" he said to me, dryly. "We shall do very well without
them."

We decided to fight on the morrow behind the haystacks, at six o'clock
in the morning.

Seeing us talking in such a friendly manner, Iwán Ignatiitch, full of
joy, nearly betrayed us.

"You should have done that long ago," he said to me, with a face of
satisfaction. "Better a hollow peace than an open quarrel."

"What is that you say, Iwán Ignatiitch?" said the Commandant's wife, who
was playing patience in a corner. "I did not exactly catch what you
said."

Iwán Ignatiitch, who saw my face darken, recollected his promise, became
confused, and did not know what to say. Chvabrine came to the rescue.

"Iwán Ignatiitch," said he, "approves of the compact we have made."

"And with whom, my little father, did you quarrel?"

"Why, with Petr' Andréjïtch, to be sure, and we even got to high words."

"What for?"

"About a mere trifle, over a little song."

"Fine thing to quarrel over--a little song! How did it happen?"

"Thus. Petr' Andréjïtch lately composed a song, and he began singing it
to me this morning. So I--I struck up mine, 'Captain's daughter, don't
go abroad at dead of night!' As we did not sing in the same key, Petr'
Andréjïtch became angry. But afterwards he reflected that 'every one is
free to sing what he pleases,' and that's all."

Chvabrine's insolence made me furious, but no one else, except myself,
understood his coarse allusions. Nobody, at least, took up the subject.
From poetry the conversation passed to poets in general, and the
Commandant made the remark that they were all rakes and confirmed
drunkards; he advised me as a friend to give up poetry as a thing
opposed to the service, and leading to no good.

Chvabrine's presence was to me unbearable. I hastened to take leave of
the Commandant and his family. After coming home I looked at my sword; I
tried its point, and I went to bed after ordering Savéliitch to wake me
on the morrow at six o'clock.

On the following day, at the appointed hour, I was already behind the
haystacks, waiting for my foeman. It was not long before he appeared.

"We may be surprised," he said to me; "we must make haste."

We laid aside our uniforms, and in our waistcoats we drew our swords
from the scabbard.

At this moment Iwán Ignatiitch, followed by five pensioners, came out
from behind a heap of hay. He gave us an order to go at once before the
Commandant. We sulkily obeyed. The soldiers surrounded us, and we
followed Iwán Ignatiitch who brought us along in triumph, walking with
a military step, with majestic gravity.

We entered the Commandant's house. Iwán Ignatiitch threw the door wide
open, and exclaimed, emphatically--

"They are taken!"

Vassilissa Igorofna ran to meet us.

"What does all this mean? Plotting assassination in our very fort! Iván
Kouzmitch, put them under arrest at once. Petr' Andréjïtch, Alexey
Iványtch, give up your swords, give them up--give them up. Palashka,
take away the swords to the garret. Petr' Andréjïtch, I did not expect
this of you; aren't you ashamed of yourself? As to Alexey Iványtch, it's
different; he was transferred from the Guard for sending a soul into the
other world. He does not believe in our Lord! But do you wish to do
likewise?"

Iván Kouzmitch approved of all his wife said, repeating--

"Look there, now, Vassilissa Igorofna is quite right--duels are
formally forbidden by martial law."

Palashka had taken away our swords, and had carried them to the garret.
I could not help laughing. Chvabrine looked grave.

"In spite of all the respect I have for you," he said, coolly, to the
Commandant's wife, "I cannot help remarking that you are giving yourself
useless trouble by trying us at your tribunal. Leave this cure do Iván
Kouzmitch--it is his business."

"What! what! my little father!" retorted the Commandant's wife, "are not
husband and wife the same flesh and spirit? Iván Kouzmitch, are you
trifling? Lock them up separately, and keep them on broad and water till
this ridiculous idea goes out of their heads. And Father Garasim shall
make them do penance that they may ask pardon of heaven and of men."

Iván Kouzmitch did not know what to do. Marya Ivánofna was very pale.
Little by little the storm sank. The Commandant's wife became more easy
to deal with. She ordered us to make friends. Palashka brought us back
our swords. We left the house apparently reconciled. Iván Ignatiitch
accompanied us.

"Weren't you ashamed," I said to him, angrily, "thus to denounce us to
the Commandant after giving me your solemn word not to do so?"

"As God is holy," replied he, "I said nothing to Iván Kouzmitch; it was
Vassilissa Igorofna who wormed it all out of me. It was she who took all
the necessary measures unknown to the Commandant. As it is, heaven be
praised that it has all ended in this way."

After this reply he returned to his quarters, and I remained alone with
Chvabrine.

"Our affair can't end thus," I said to him.

"Certainly not," rejoined Chvabrine. "You shall wash out your insolence
in blood. But they will watch us; we must pretend to be friends for a
few days. Good-bye."

And we parted as if nothing had happened.

Upon my return to the Commandant's, I sat down according to my custom by
Marya Ivánofna; her father was not at home, and her mother was engaged
with household cares. We spoke in a low voice Marya Ivánofna reproached
me tenderly for the anxiety my quarrel with Chvabrine had occasioned
her.

"My heart failed me," said she, "when they came to tell us that you were
going to draw swords on each other. How strange men are! For a word
forgotten the next week they are ready to cut each other's throats, and
to sacrifice not only their life, but their honour, and the happiness of
those who--But I am sure it was not you who began the quarrel; it was
Alexey Iványtch who was the aggressor."

