I easily guessed that he was the officer dismissed from the Guards for
the affair of the duel--Alexis Chabrine. He was very intelligent; his
conversation was sprightly and interesting. He described with impulse
and gayety the Commandant's family, society, and in general the whole
country round. I was laughing heartily, when Ignatius, the same
old pensioner whom I had seen mending his uniform in the Captain's
waiting-room, entered, and gave me an invitation to dinner from Basilia
Mironoff, the Captain's wife. Alexis declared that he would accompany
me.

Approaching the Commandant's house we saw on the square some twenty
little old pensioners, with long queues and three-cornered hats.
These old men were drawn up in line of battle. Before them stood
the Commandant, a fresh and vigorous old man of high stature, in
dressing-gown and cotton cap. As soon as he saw us, he approached,
addressed me a few affable words, and then resumed his drill. We
were going to stay to see the manoeuvering, but he begged us to go on
immediately to the house, promising to join us at once; "for," said he,
"there is really nothing to be seen here."

Basilia received us kindly, and with simplicity, treating me like an
old acquaintance. The pensioner and the maid Polacca were laying the
table-cloth.

"What is the matter with my dear Ivan Mironoff, today, that he is so
long instructing his troops?" said the mistress. "Polacca, go and
bring him to dinner. And where is my child, Marie?" Scarcely had she
pronounced this name, than a young girl about sixteen entered the
room;--a rosy, round-faced girl, wearing her hair in smooth bandeaux
caught behind her ears, which were red with modesty and shyness. She did
not please me very much at the first glance; I was prejudiced against
her by Alexis, who had described the Captain's daughter to me as a fool.
Marie seated herself in a corner and began to sew. The soup was brought
on the table. Basilia, not seeing her husband coming, sent the maid a
second time to call him.

"Tell the master that his inspection can wait; the soup is cooling.
Thank God! the drills need not be lost; there will be time enough yet to
use his voice at his leisure."

The captain soon appeared with his one-eyed officer.

"What's this, my dear," said Basilia; "the table has been served some
time, and no one could make you come."

"You see, Basilia, I was busy with the service, instructing my good
soldiers."

"Come, come, Ivan Mironoff, that's boasting. The service does not suit
them, and as for you, you know nothing about it. You should have stayed
at home and prayed God, that suits you much better. My dear guests, to
table."

We took our places for dinner. Basilia was not silent a moment; she
overwhelmed me with questions: Who were my parents? Were they living?
Where did they reside? What was their fortune? When she learned that my
father owned three hundred serfs, she exclaimed:

"You see there are some rich people in the world--and we, my dear sir,
in point of souls, we possess only the maid Polacca. Yet, thank God, we
live, somehow or other. We have but one care, that is Marie, a girl that
must be married off. And what fortune has she? The price of two baths
per annum. If only she could find a worthy husband. If not, there she
is, eternally a maid."

I glanced at Marie; she blushed, tears were dropping into her soup. I
pitied her, and hastened to change the conversation. "I have heard that
the Bashkirs intend to attack your fortress?"

"Who said so," replied Ivan Mironoff.


