"Dear, good Marya Ivánofna," I said to her, "be my wife. Consent to give
me happiness."

She became reasonable again.

"For heaven's sake, calm yourself," she said, withdrawing her hand. "You
are still in danger; your wound may reopen; be careful of yourself--were
it only for my sake."

After these words she went away, leaving me at the height of happiness.
I felt that life was given back to me.

"She will be mine! She loves me!"

This thought filled all my being.

From this moment I hourly got better. It was the barber of the regiment
who dressed my wound, for there was no other doctor in all the fort,
and, thank God, he did not attempt any doctoring. Youth and nature
hastened my recovery. All the Commandant's family took the greatest
care of me. Marya Ivánofna scarcely ever left me. It is unnecessary to
say that I seized the first favourable opportunity to resume my
interrupted proposal, and this time Marya heard me more patiently. She
naïvely avowed to me her love, and added that her parents would, in all
probability, rejoice in her happiness.

"But think well about it," she used to say to me. "Will there be no
objections on the part of your family?"

These words made me reflect. I had no doubt of my mother's tenderness;
but knowing the character and way of thinking of my father, I foresaw
that my love would not touch him very much, and that he would call it
youthful folly. I frankly confessed this to Marya Ivánofna, but in spite
of this I resolved to write to my father as eloquently as possible to
ask his blessing. I showed my letter to Marya Ivánofna, who found it so
convincing and touching that she had no doubt of success, and gave
herself up to the feelings of her heart with all the confidence of youth
and love.

I made peace with Chvabrine during the early days of my convalescence.
Iván Kouzmitch said to me, reproaching me for the duel--

"You know, Petr' Andréjïtch, properly speaking, I ought to put you under
arrest; but you are already sufficiently punished without that. As to
Alexey Iványtch, he is confined by my order, and under strict guard, in
the corn magazine, and Vassilissa Igorofna has his sword under lock and
key. He will have time to reflect and repent at his ease."

I was too happy to cherish the least rancour. I began to intercede for
Chvabrine, and the good Commandant, with his wife's leave, agreed to set
him at liberty. Chvabrine came to see me. He expressed deep regret for
all that had occurred, declared it was all his fault, and begged me to
forget the past. Not being of a rancorous disposition, I heartily
forgave him both our quarrel and my wound. I saw in his slander the
irritation of wounded vanity and rejected love, so I generously forgave
my unhappy rival.

I was soon completely recovered, and was able to go back to my quarters.
I impatiently awaited the answer to my letter, not daring to hope, but
trying to stifle sad forebodings that would arise. I had not yet
attempted any explanation as regarded Vassilissa Igorofna and her
husband. But my courtship could be no surprise to them, as neither Marya
nor myself made any secret of our feelings before them, and we were sure
beforehand of their consent.

At last, one fine day, Savéliitch came into my room with a letter in his
hand.

I took it trembling. The address was written in my father's hand.

This prepared me for something serious, since it was usually my mother
who wrote, and he only added a few lines at the end. For a long time I
could not make up my mind to break the seal. I read over the solemn
address:--

"To my son, Petr' Andréjïtch Grineff, District of Orenburg, Fort
Bélogorsk."

I tried to guess from my father's handwriting in what mood he had
written the letter. At last I resolved to open it, and I did not need to
read more than the first few lines to see that the whole affair was at
the devil. Here are the contents of this letter:--

"My Son Petr',--

"We received the 15th of this month the letter in which you ask our
parental blessing and our consent to your marriage with Marya Ivánofna,
the Mironoff daughter.[46] And not only have I no intention of giving
you either my blessing or my consent, but I intend to come and punish
you well for your follies, like a little boy, in spite of your officer's
rank, because you have shown me that you are not fit to wear the sword
entrusted to you for the defence of your country, and not for fighting
duels with fools like yourself. I shall write immediately to Andréj
Karlovitch to beg him to send you away from Fort Bélogorsk to some place
still further removed, so that you may get over this folly.

"Upon hearing of your duel and wound your mother fell ill with sorrow,
and she is still confined to her bed.

"What will become of you? I pray God may correct you, though I scarcely
dare trust in His goodness.

"Your father,

"A.G."

The perusal of this letter aroused in me a medley of feelings. The
harsh expressions which my father had not scrupled to make use of hurt
me deeply; the contempt which he cast on Marya Ivánofna appeared to me
as unjust as it was unseemly; while, finally, the idea of being sent
away from Fort Bélogorsk dismayed me. But I was, above all, grieved at
my mother's illness.

I was disgusted with Savéliitch, never doubting that it was he who had
made known my duel to my parents. After walking up and down awhile in my
little room, I suddenly stopped short before him, and said to him,
angrily--

"It seems that it did not satisfy you that, thanks to you, I've been
wounded and at death's door, but that you must also want to kill my
mother as well."

Savéliitch remained motionless, as it struck by a thunderbolt.

"Have pity on me, sir," he exclaimed, almost sobbing. "What is it you
deign to tell me--that I am the cause of your wound? But God knows I was
only running to stand between you and Alexey Iványtch's sword. Accursed
old age alone prevented me. What have I now done to your mother?"

"What did you do?" I retorted. "Who told you to write and denounce me?
Were you put in my service to be a spy upon me?"

