"Basilia," said the Captain, "women have nothing to do here; take away
Marie; you see the child is more dead than alive." Basilia, whom the
sound of the balls had rendered more yielding, glanced at the steppe
where much movement was visible, and said: "Ivan, life and death are
from God; bless Marie; come, child, to thy father."

Pale and trembling, Marie came and knelt, bending low before him. The
old Commandant made three times the sign of the cross over her, then
raising, kissed her, and said in a broken voice: "Oh! my dear Marie!
pray to God, he will never abandon thee. If an honest man seek thee, may
God give you both love and goodness. Live together as we have lived; my
wife and I. Adieu! my dear Marie! Basilia, take her away quickly."

Marie put her arms around his neck and sobbed. The Captain's wife, in
tears, said: "Embrace us also; adieu, Ivan; if ever I have crossed you,
forgive me."

"Adieu! adieu! my dear," said the Commandant, kissing his old companion.
"Come! enough! go to the house, and if you have time dress Marie in her
best; let her wear a sarafan, embroidered in gold, as is our custom for
burial."

Ivan Mironoff returned to us, and fixed all his attention upon the
enemy. The rebels collected around their chief and suddenly began to
advance. "Be firm, boys," said the Commandant, "the assault begins." At
that instant savage war-cries were heard. The rebels were approaching
the fortress with their accustomed fleetness. Our cannon was charged
with grape and canister. The Commandant let them come within short
range, and again put a light to his piece. The shot struck in the midst
of the force, which scattered in every direction. Only their chief
remained in advance, and he, waving his sabre, seemed to be rallying
them. Their piercing shouts, which had ceased an instant, redoubled
again. "Now, children," ordered the Captain, "open the gate, beat the
drum, and advance! Follow me, for a sortie!"

The Captain, Ignatius and I were in an instant beyond the parapet. But
the frightened garrison had not moved from the square. "What are you
doing, my children?" shouted the Captain; "if we must die, let us die;
the imperial service demands it!"

At this moment the rebels fell upon us, and forced the entrance to the
citadel. The drum was silent; the garrison threw down their arms. I had
been knocked down, but I rose and entered, pell-mell, with the crowds
into the fortress. I saw the Commandant wounded on the head, and closed
upon by a small troop of bandits, who demanded the keys. I was running
to his aid when several powerful Cossacks seized me and bound me with
their long sashes, crying out: "Wait there, traitor to the Czar, till we
know what to do with you."

We were dragged along the streets. The inhabitants came out of their
houses offering bread and salt. The bells were rung. Suddenly, shouts
announced that the Czar was on the square, awaiting to receive the oaths
of the prisoners.

Pougatcheff was seated in an arm-chair on the steps of the Commandant's
house. He was robed in an elegant Cossack cafetan embroidered on the
seams. A high cap of martin-skin, ornamented with gold tassels, covered
his brow almost to his flashing eyes. His face seemed to me not unknown.
Cossack chiefs surrounded him. Father Garasim, pale and trembling,
stood, the cross in his hand, at the foot of the steps, and seemed to
supplicate in silence for the victims brought before him.

On the square itself, a gallows was hastily erected. When we approached,
the Bashkirs opened a passage through the crowd and presented us to
Pougatcheff. The bells ceased; the deepest silence prevailed. "Which is
the Commandant?" asked the usurper. Our Corporal came out of the crowd
and pointed to Mironoff. Pougatcheff looked at the old man with a
terrible expression, and said to him: "How did you dare to oppose me,
your emperor?"

The Commandant, weakened by his wound, collected all his energy, and
said, in a firm but faint voice: "You are not my emperor; you are a
usurper and a brigand."


