"You too, Captain! Then of course I must give in gracefully, and declare
that the sun at noon-day is not more palpably evident than the sense of
Barbican's formula."

"You asked for Algebra, you know," observed Barbican.

"Rock crystal is nothing to it!"

"The fact is, Barbican," said the Captain, who had been looking over the
paper, "you have worked the thing out very well. You have the integral
equation of the living forces, and I have no doubt it will give us the
result sought for."

"Yes, but I should like to understand it, you know," cried Ardan: "I
would give ten years of the Captain's life to understand it!"

"Listen then," said Barbican. "Half of _v_ prime squared less _v_
squared, is the formula giving us the half variation of the living
force."

"Mac pretends he understands all that!"

"You need not be a _Solomon_ to do it," said the Captain. "All these
signs that you appear to consider so cabalistic form a language the
clearest, the shortest, and the most logical, for all those who can read
it."

"You pretend, Captain, that, by means of these hieroglyphics, far more
incomprehensible than the sacred Ibis of the Egyptians, you can
discover the velocity at which the Projectile should start?"

"Most undoubtedly," replied the Captain, "and, by the same formula I can
even tell you the rate of our velocity at any particular point of our
journey."

"You can?"

"I can."

"Then you're just as deep a one as our President."

"No, Ardan; not at all. The really difficult part of the question
Barbican has done. That is, to make out such an equation as takes into
account all the conditions of the problem. After that, it's a simple
affair of Arithmetic, requiring only a knowledge of the four rules to
work it out."

"Very simple," observed Ardan, who always got muddled at any kind of a
difficult sum in addition.

"Captain," said Barbican, "_you_ could have found the formulas too, if
you tried."

"I don't know about that," was the Captain's reply, "but I do know that
this formula is wonderfully come at."

"Now, Ardan, listen a moment," said Barbican, "and you will see what
sense there is in all these letters."

"I listen," sighed Ardan with the resignation of a martyr.

"_d_ is the distance from the centre of the Earth to the centre of the
Moon, for it is from the centres that we must calculate the
attractions."

"That I comprehend."

"_r_ is the radius of the Earth."

"That I comprehend."

"_m_ is the mass or volume of the Earth; _m_ prime that of the Moon. We
must take the mass of the two attracting bodies into consideration,
since attraction is in direct proportion to their masses."

"That I comprehend."

"_g_ is the gravity or the velocity acquired at the end of a second by a
body falling towards the centre of the Earth. Clear?"

"That I comprehend."

"Now I represent by _x_ the varying distance that separates the
Projectile from the centre of the Earth, and by _v_ prime its velocity
at that distance."

"That I comprehend."

"Finally, _v_ is its velocity when quitting our atmosphere."

"Yes," chimed in the Captain, "it is for this point, you see, that the
velocity had to be calculated, because we know already that the initial
velocity is exactly the three halves of the velocity when the Projectile
quits the atmosphere."

"That I don't comprehend," cried the Frenchman, energetically.

"It's simple enough, however," said Barbican.

"Not so simple as a simpleton," replied the Frenchman.

"The Captain merely means," said Barbican, "that at the instant the
Projectile quitted the terrestrial atmosphere it had already lost a
third of its initial velocity."

"So much as a third?"

"Yes, by friction against the atmospheric layers: the quicker its
motion, the greater resistance it encountered."

"That of course I admit, but your _v_ squared and your _v_ prime squared
rattle in my head like nails in a box!"

"The usual effect of Algebra on one who is a stranger to it; to finish
you, our next step is to express numerically the value of these several
symbols. Now some of them are already known, and some are to be
calculated."


