"Get up--go ahead, old fellow!" shouted Joe, with
delight, doing his best to urge this rather novel team.
"Here is a new style of travelling!--no more horses for
me. An elephant, if you please!"

"But where is he taking us to?" said Kennedy, whose
rifle itched in his grasp.

"He's taking us exactly to where we want to go, my
dear Dick. A little patience!"

"'Wig-a-more! wig-a-more!' as the Scotch country folks say,"
shouted Joe, in high glee. "Gee-up! gee-up there!"

The huge animal now broke into a very rapid gallop.
He flung his trunk from side to side, and his monstrous
bounds gave the car several rather heavy thumps. Meanwhile
the doctor stood ready, hatchet in hand, to cut the
rope, should need arise.

"But," said he, "we shall not give up our anchor until
the last moment."

This drive, with an elephant for the team, lasted about
an hour and a half; yet the animal did not seem in the
least fatigued. These immense creatures can go over a
great deal of ground, and, from one day to another, are
found at enormous distances from there they were last
seen, like the whales, whose mass and speed they rival.

"In fact," said Joe, "it's a whale that we have harpooned;
and we're only doing just what whalemen do when out fishing."

But a change in the nature of the ground compelled
the doctor to vary his style of locomotion. A dense grove
of calmadores was descried on the horizon, about three
miles away, on the north of the prairie. So it became
necessary to detach the balloon from its draught-animal
at last.

Kennedy was intrusted with the job of bringing the
elephant to a halt. He drew his rifle to his shoulder, but
his position was not favorable to a successful shot; so
that the first ball fired flattened itself on the animal's
skull, as it would have done against an iron plate. The
creature did not seem in the least troubled by it; but, at
the sound of the discharge, he had increased his speed,
and now was going as fast as a horse at full gallop.

"The deuce!" ejaculated Kennedy.

"What a solid head!" commented Joe.

"We'll try some conical balls behind the shoulder-joint,"
said Kennedy, reloading his rifle with care. In
another moment he fired.

The animal gave a terrible cry, but went on faster
than ever.

"Come!" said Joe, taking aim with another gun, "I
must help you, or we'll never end it." And now two balls
penetrated the creature's side.

The elephant halted, lifted his trunk, and resumed his
run toward the wood with all his speed; he shook his huge
head, and the blood began to gush from his wounds.

"Let us keep up our fire, Mr. Kennedy."

"And a continuous fire, too," urged the doctor, "for
we are close on the woods."

Ten shots more were discharged. The elephant made
a fearful bound; the car and balloon cracked as though
every thing were going to pieces, and the shock made the
doctor drop his hatchet on the ground.

The situation was thus rendered really very alarming;
the anchor-rope, which had securely caught, could not be
disengaged, nor could it yet be cut by the knives of our
aeronauts, and the balloon was rushing headlong toward
the wood, when the animal received a ball in the eye just
as he lifted his head. On this he halted, faltered, his knees
bent under him, and he uncovered his whole flank to the
assaults of his enemies in the balloon.

"A bullet in his heart!" said Kennedy, discharging
one last rifle-shot.

The elephant uttered a long bellow of terror and agony,
then raised himself up for a moment, twirling his trunk in
the air, and finally fell with all his weight upon one of his
tusks, which he broke off short. He was dead.

"His tusk's broken!" exclaimed Kennedy--"ivory too
that in England would bring thirty-five guineas per
hundred pounds."

"As much as that?" said Joe, scrambling down to the
ground by the anchor-rope.

"What's the use of sighing over it, Dick?" said the
doctor. "Are we ivory merchants? Did we come hither
to make money?"

Joe examined the anchor and found it solidly attached
to the unbroken tusk. The doctor and Dick leaped out on
the ground, while the balloon, now half emptied, hovered
over the body of the huge animal.

"What a splendid beast!" said Kennedy, "what a mass of
flesh! I never saw an elephant of that size in India!"

"There's nothing surprising about that, my dear Dick;
the elephants of Central Africa are the finest in the world.
The Andersons and the Cummings have hunted so incessantly
in the neighborhood of the Cape, that these animals
have migrated to the equator, where they are often met
with in large herds."

"In the mean while, I hope," added Joe, "that we'll
taste a morsel of this fellow. I'll undertake to get you a
good dinner at his expense. Mr. Kennedy will go off and
hunt for an hour or two; the doctor will make an inspection
of the balloon, and, while they're busy in that way,
I'll do the cooking."


