Whether Local Distance Impedes the Knowledge in the Separated Soul?

Objection 1: It would seem that local distance impedes the separated
soul's knowledge. For Augustine says (De Cura pro Mort. xiii), that
"the souls of the dead are where they cannot know what is done here."
But they know what is done among themselves. Therefore local distance
impedes the knowledge in the separated soul.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says (De Divin. Daemon. iii), that "the
demons' rapidity of movement enables them to tell things unknown to
us." But agility of movement would be useless in that respect unless
their knowledge was impeded by local distance; which, therefore, is a
much greater hindrance to the knowledge of the separated soul, whose
nature is inferior to the demon's.

Obj. 3: Further, as there is distance of place, so is there distance
of time. But distance of time impedes knowledge in the separated
soul, for the soul is ignorant of the future. Therefore it seems that
distance of place also impedes its knowledge.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Luke 16:23), that Dives, "lifting
up his eyes when he was in torment, saw Abraham afar off." Therefore
local distance does not impede knowledge in the separated soul.

_I answer that,_ Some have held that the separated soul knows the
singular by abstraction from the sensible. If that were so, it might
be that local distance would impede its knowledge; for either the
sensible would need to act upon the soul, or the soul upon the
sensible, and in either case a determinate distance would be
necessary. This is, however, impossible because abstraction of the
species from the sensible is done through the senses and other
sensible faculties which do not remain actually in the soul apart
from the body. But the soul when separated understands singulars by
species derived from the Divine light, which is indifferent to what
is near or distant. Hence knowledge in the separated soul is not
hindered by local distance.

Reply Obj. 1: Augustine says that the souls of the departed cannot
see what is done here, not because they are "there," as if impeded by
local distance; but for some other cause, as we shall explain (A. 8).

Reply Obj. 2: Augustine speaks there in accordance with the opinion
that demons have bodies naturally united to them, and so have
sensitive powers, which require local distance. In the same book he
expressly sets down this opinion, though apparently rather by way of
narration than of assertion, as we may gather from _De Civ. Dei_ xxi,
10.

Reply Obj. 3: The future, which is distant in time, does not actually
exist, and therefore is not knowable in itself, because so far as a
thing falls short of being, so far does it fall short of being
knowable. But what is locally distant exists actually, and is
knowable in itself. Hence we cannot argue from distance of time to
distance of place.
_
