For my part, I never presum'd that my Minde was more perfect in any
thing then an ordinary Mans; nay, I have often wish'd to have had my
thoughts as quick, my imagination as clear and distinct, and my memory
as large and as ready as some other Men have had. And I know no
Qualities which serve more then those to the perfection of the Minde;
for as for Reason or Understanding, forasmuch as it is the only thing
which makes us Men, and distinguisheth us from beasts, I will beleeve it
to be entire in every One, and follow herein the common opinion of the
Philosophers, who say, That there is only more or less among the
Accidents, and not amongst the Forms or nature of the Individuals of one
species.

But I shall not stick to say, That I beleeve my self very happy, in
having encountred from my youth with certain ways which have led me to
considerations and Maximes, from which I have found a Method; whereby
methinks, I have the means by degrees to augment my knowledg, and by
little and little to raise it up to the highest pitch, whereto the
meaness of my capacity, & the short course of my life can permit it to
attain. For I have already reaped such fruits from it, that although in
the judgment I make of my self, I endevour always rather to incline to
mistrust, then to presumption. And looking on the divers actions and
undertakings of all Men, with the eye of a Philosopher, there is almost
none which to me seems not vain and useless. Yet I am extremely
satisfied with the Progress, which (as it seems to me) I have already
made in the search of Truth, and do conceive such hopes for the future,
That if among the employments of Men, purely Men, there is any solidly
good, and of importance, I dare beleeve it is that which I have chosen:
Yet it may be that I deceive my self, and perhaps it is but a little
Copper and Glass which I take for Gold and Diamonds. I know how subject
we are to mistake in those things which concern us, and how jealous we
ought to be of the judgment of our friends, when it is in our favor. But
I should willingly in this Discourse, trace out unto you the ways which
I have followed, and represent therein my life, as in a Picture, to the
end, that every one may judge thereof; and that learning from common
Fame, what mens opinions are of it, I may finde a new means of
instructing my self; which I shall add to those which I customarily make
use of.

Neither is it my design to teach a Method which every Man ought to
follow, for the good conduct of his reason; but only to shew after what
manner I have endevoured to order mine own. Those who undertake to give
precepts, ought to esteem themselves more able, then those to whom they
give them, and are blame-worthy, if they fail in the least. But
proposing this but as a History, or if you will have it so, but as a
Fable; wherein amongst other examples, which may be imitated, we may
perhaps find divers others which we may have reason to decline: I hope
it will be profitable to some, without being hurtfull to any; and that
the liberty I take will be gratefull to all.

I have been bred up to Letters from mine infancy; & because I was
perswaded, that by their means a man might acquire a clear and certain
knowledg of all that's usefull for this life, I was extremely desirous
to learn them: But as soon as I had finish'd all the course of my
Studies, at the end whereof Men are usually receiv'd amongst the rank of
the learned. I wholly changed my opinion, for I found my self intangled
in so many doubts and errors, that me thought I had made no other profit
in seeking to instruct my self, but that I had the more discovered mine
own ignorance. Yet I was in one of the most famous Schools in _Europe_;
where I thought, if there were any on earth, there ought to have been
learned Men. I had learnt all what others had learnt; even unsatisfied
with the Sciences which were taught us, I had read over all Books
(which I could possibly procure) treating of such as are held to be the
rarest and the most curious. Withall, I knew the judgment others made of
me; and I perceiv'd that I was no less esteem'd then my fellow Students,
although there were some amongst them that were destin'd to fill our
Masters rooms. And in fine, our age seem'd to me as flourishing and as
fertile of good Wits, as any of the preceding, which made me take the
liberty to judg of all other men by my self, and to think, That there
was no such learning in the world, as formerly I had been made beleeve.


