Examining carefully afterwards what I was; and seeing that I could
suppose that I had no _body_, and that there was no _World_, nor any
_place_ where I was: but for all this, I could not feign that I _was
not_; and that even contrary thereto, thinking to doubt the truth of
other things, it most evidently and certainly followed, That _I was_:
whereas, if I had ceas'd to _think_, although all the rest of what-ever
I had imagined were true, I had no reason to beleeve that _I had been_.
I knew then that I was a substance, whose whole essence or nature is,
but to _think_, and who to _be_, hath need of no place, nor depends on
any materiall thing. So that this _Me_, to wit, my Soul, by which I am
what I am, is wholly distinct from the Body, and more easie to be known
then _it_; and although _that_ were not, it would not therefore cease to
be what it is.

After this I considered in generall what is requisite in a Proposition
to make it true and certain: for since I had found out one which I knew
to be so, I thought I ought also to consider wherein that certainty
consisted: and having observed, That there is nothing at all in this, _I
think_, therefore _I am_, which assures me that I speak the truth,
except this, that I see most cleerly, That _to think_, one must have a
_being_; I judg'd that I might take for a generall rule, That those
things which we conceive cleerly and distinctly, are all true; and that
the onely difficulty is punctually to observe what those are which we
distinctly conceive.

In pursuance whereof, reflecting on what I doubted, and that
consequently my _being_ was not perfect; for I clearly perceived, that
it was a greater perfection to know, then to doubt, I advised in my
self to seek from whence I had learnt to think on something which was
more perfect then I; and I knew evidently that it must be of some nature
which was indeed more perfect. As for what concerns the thoughts I had
of divers other things without my self, as of heaven, earth, light,
heat, and a thousand more, I was not so much troubled to know whence
they came, for that I observed nothing in them which seemed to render
them superiour to me; I might beleeve, that if they were true, they were
dependancies from my nature, as far forth as it had any perfection; and
if they were not, I made no accompt of them; that is to say, That they
were in me, because I had something deficient. But it could not be the
same with the _Idea_ of a being more perfect then mine: For to esteem of
it as of nothing, was a thing manifestly impossible. And because there
is no lesse repugnancy that the more perfect should succeed from and
depend upon the less perfect, then for something to proceed from
nothing, I could no more hold it from my self: So as it followed, that
it must have bin put into me by a Nature which was truly more perfect
then _I_, and even which had in it all the perfections whereof I could
have an _Idea_; to wit, (to explain my self in one word) God. Whereto I
added, that since I knew some perfections which I had not, I was not the
onely _Being_ which had an existence, (I shall, under favour, use here
freely the terms of the Schools) but that of necessity there must be
some other more perfect whereon I depended, and from whom I had gotten
all what I had: For had I been alone, and depending upon no other thing,
so that I had had of my self all that little which I participated of a
perfect Being, I might have had by the same reason from my self, all the
remainder which I knew I wanted, and so have been my self infinite,
eternall, immutable, all-knowing, almighty; and lastly, have had all
those perfections which I have observed to be in God. For according to
the way of reasoning I have now followed, to know the nature of God, as
far as mine own was capable of it, I was onely to consider of those
things of which I found an _Idea_ in me, whether the possessing of them
were a perfection or no; and I was sure, that any of those which had any
imperfections were not in him, but that all others were. I saw that
doubtfulness, inconstancy, sorrow and the like, could not be in him,
seeing I could my self have wish'd to have been exempted from them.
Besides this, I had the _Ideas_ of divers sensible and corporeall
things; for although I supposed that I doted, and that all that I saw or
imagined was false; yet could I not deny but that these _Ideas_ were
truly in my thoughts. But because I had most evidently known in my self,
That the understanding Nature is distinct from the corporeall,
considering that all composition witnesseth a dependency, and that
dependency is manifestly a defect, I thence judged that it could not be
a perfection in God to be composed of those two Natures; and that by
consequence he was not so composed. But that if there were any Bodies in
the world, or els any intelligences, or other Natures which were not
wholly perfect, their being must depend from his power in such a manner,
that they could not subsist one moment without him.

Thence I went in search of other Truths; and having proposed _Geometry_
for my object, which I conceived as a continued Body, or a space
indefinitely spred in length, bredth, height or depth, divisible into
divers parts, which might take severall figures and bignesses, and be
moved and transposed every way. For the Geometricians suppose all this
in their object. I past through some of their most simple
demonstrations; and having observed that this great certaintie, which
all the world grants them, is founded only on this, that men evidently
conceived them, following the rule I already mentioned. I observed also
that there was nothing at all in them which ascertain'd me of the
existence of their object. As for example, I well perceive, that
supposing a Triangle, three angles necessarily must be equall to two
right ones: but yet nevertheless I saw nothing which assured me that
there was a Triangle in the world. Whereas returning to examine the
_Idea_ which I had of a perfect Being, _I_ found its existence comprised
in it, in the same manner as it was comprised in that of a Triangle,
where the three angles are equall to two right ones; or in that of a
sphere, where all the parts are equally distant from the center. Or even
yet more evidently, and that by consequence, it is at least as certain
that God, who is that perfect Being, is, or exists, as any demonstration
in Geometry can be.


