8. Two other ideals, which never appeared above the horizon in Greek
Philosophy, float before the minds of men in our own day: one seen more
clearly than formerly, as though each year and each generation brought
us nearer to some great change; the other almost in the same degree
retiring from view behind the laws of nature, as if oppressed by them,
but still remaining a silent hope of we know not what hidden in the
heart of man. The first ideal is the future of the human race in this
world; the second the future of the individual in another. The first is
the more perfect realization of our own present life; the second,
the abnegation of it: the one, limited by experience, the other,
transcending it. Both of them have been and are powerful motives of
action; there are a few in whom they have taken the place of all earthly
interests. The hope of a future for the human race at first sight seems
to be the more disinterested, the hope of individual existence the more
egotistical, of the two motives. But when men have learned to resolve
their hope of a future either for themselves or for the world into the
will of God--'not my will but Thine,' the difference between them falls
away; and they may be allowed to make either of them the basis of their
lives, according to their own individual character or temperament. There
is as much faith in the willingness to work for an unseen future in this
world as in another. Neither is it inconceivable that some rare nature
may feel his duty to another generation, or to another century, almost
as strongly as to his own, or that living always in the presence of God,
he may realize another world as vividly as he does this.

The greatest of all ideals may, or rather must be conceived by us under
similitudes derived from human qualities; although sometimes, like the
Jewish prophets, we may dash away these figures of speech and describe
the nature of God only in negatives. These again by degrees acquire a
positive meaning. It would be well, if when meditating on the higher
truths either of philosophy or religion, we sometimes substituted one
form of expression for another, lest through the necessities of language
we should become the slaves of mere words.

There is a third ideal, not the same, but akin to these, which has a
place in the home and heart of every believer in the religion of Christ,
and in which men seem to find a nearer and more familiar truth,
the Divine man, the Son of Man, the Saviour of mankind, Who is the
first-born and head of the whole family in heaven and earth, in Whom
the Divine and human, that which is without and that which is within the
range of our earthly faculties, are indissolubly united. Neither is this
divine form of goodness wholly separable from the ideal of the Christian
Church, which is said in the New Testament to be 'His body,' or at
variance with those other images of good which Plato sets before us. We
see Him in a figure only, and of figures of speech we select but a few,
and those the simplest, to be the expression of Him. We behold Him in
a picture, but He is not there. We gather up the fragments of His
discourses, but neither do they represent Him as He truly was. His
dwelling is neither in heaven nor earth, but in the heart of man.
This is that image which Plato saw dimly in the distance, which, when
existing among men, he called, in the language of Homer, 'the likeness
of God,' the likeness of a nature which in all ages men have felt to be
greater and better than themselves, and which in endless forms, whether
derived from Scripture or nature, from the witness of history or from
the human heart, regarded as a person or not as a person, with or
without parts or passions, existing in space or not in space, is and
will always continue to be to mankind the Idea of Good.


