The second difficulty relates to Plato's conception of harmonics.
Three classes of harmonists are distinguished by him:--first, the
Pythagoreans, whom he proposes to consult as in the previous discussion
on music he was to consult Damon--they are acknowledged to be masters
in the art, but are altogether deficient in the knowledge of its higher
import and relation to the good; secondly, the mere empirics, whom
Glaucon appears to confuse with them, and whom both he and Socrates
ludicrously describe as experimenting by mere auscultation on the
intervals of sounds. Both of these fall short in different degrees of
the Platonic idea of harmony, which must be studied in a purely
abstract way, first by the method of problems, and secondly as a part of
universal knowledge in relation to the idea of good.

The allegory has a political as well as a philosophical meaning. The
den or cave represents the narrow sphere of politics or law (compare the
description of the philosopher and lawyer in the Theaetetus), and
the light of the eternal ideas is supposed to exercise a disturbing
influence on the minds of those who return to this lower world. In other
words, their principles are too wide for practical application; they are
looking far away into the past and future, when their business is with
the present. The ideal is not easily reduced to the conditions of actual
life, and may often be at variance with them. And at first, those who
return are unable to compete with the inhabitants of the den in the
measurement of the shadows, and are derided and persecuted by them; but
after a while they see the things below in far truer proportions than
those who have never ascended into the upper world. The difference
between the politician turned into a philosopher and the philosopher
turned into a politician, is symbolized by the two kinds of disordered
eyesight, the one which is experienced by the captive who is transferred
from darkness to day, the other, of the heavenly messenger who
voluntarily for the good of his fellow-men descends into the den. In
what way the brighter light is to dawn on the inhabitants of the lower
world, or how the idea of good is to become the guiding principle of
politics, is left unexplained by Plato. Like the nature and divisions of
dialectic, of which Glaucon impatiently demands to be informed, perhaps
he would have said that the explanation could not be given except to a
disciple of the previous sciences. (Symposium.)

Many illustrations of this part of the Republic may be found in modern
Politics and in daily life. For among ourselves, too, there have
been two sorts of Politicians or Statesmen, whose eyesight has become
disordered in two different ways. First, there have been great men who,
in the language of Burke, 'have been too much given to general
maxims,' who, like J.S. Mill or Burke himself, have been theorists or
philosophers before they were politicians, or who, having been students
of history, have allowed some great historical parallel, such as the
English Revolution of 1688, or possibly Athenian democracy or Roman
Imperialism, to be the medium through which they viewed contemporary
events. Or perhaps the long projecting shadow of some existing
institution may have darkened their vision. The Church of the future,
the Commonwealth of the future, the Society of the future, have
so absorbed their minds, that they are unable to see in their true
proportions the Politics of to-day. They have been intoxicated with
great ideas, such as liberty, or equality, or the greatest happiness of
the greatest number, or the brotherhood of humanity, and they no
longer care to consider how these ideas must be limited in practice or
harmonized with the conditions of human life. They are full of light,
but the light to them has become only a sort of luminous mist or
blindness. Almost every one has known some enthusiastic half-educated
person, who sees everything at false distances, and in erroneous
proportions.

With this disorder of eyesight may be contrasted another--of those who
see not far into the distance, but what is near only; who have been
engaged all their lives in a trade or a profession; who are limited to
a set or sect of their own. Men of this kind have no universal except
their own interests or the interests of their class, no principle but
the opinion of persons like themselves, no knowledge of affairs beyond
what they pick up in the streets or at their club. Suppose them to be
sent into a larger world, to undertake some higher calling, from being
tradesmen to turn generals or politicians, from being schoolmasters to
become philosophers:--or imagine them on a sudden to receive an inward
light which reveals to them for the first time in their lives a higher
idea of God and the existence of a spiritual world, by this sudden
conversion or change is not their daily life likely to be upset; and on
the other hand will not many of their old prejudices and narrownesses
still adhere to them long after they have begun to take a more
comprehensive view of human things? From familiar examples like these we
may learn what Plato meant by the eyesight which is liable to two kinds
of disorders.

Nor have we any difficulty in drawing a parallel between the young
Athenian in the fifth century before Christ who became unsettled by new
ideas, and the student of a modern University who has been the subject
of a similar 'aufklarung.' We too observe that when young men begin to
criticise customary beliefs, or to analyse the constitution of human
nature, they are apt to lose hold of solid principle (Greek). They are
like trees which have been frequently transplanted. The earth about them
is loose, and they have no roots reaching far into the soil. They 'light
upon every flower,' following their own wayward wills, or because the
wind blows them. They catch opinions, as diseases are caught--when
they are in the air. Borne hither and thither, 'they speedily fall
into beliefs' the opposite of those in which they were brought up. They
hardly retain the distinction of right and wrong; they seem to think one
thing as good as another. They suppose themselves to be searching after
truth when they are playing the game of 'follow my leader.' They fall
in love 'at first sight' with paradoxes respecting morality, some fancy
about art, some novelty or eccentricity in religion, and like lovers
they are so absorbed for a time in their new notion that they can think
of nothing else. The resolution of some philosophical or theological
question seems to them more interesting and important than any
substantial knowledge of literature or science or even than a good life.
Like the youth in the Philebus, they are ready to discourse to any one
about a new philosophy. They are generally the disciples of some eminent
professor or sophist, whom they rather imitate than understand. They may
be counted happy if in later years they retain some of the simple truths
which they acquired in early education, and which they may, perhaps,
find to be worth all the rest. Such is the picture which Plato draws and
which we only reproduce, partly in his own words, of the dangers which
beset youth in times of transition, when old opinions are fading
away and the new are not yet firmly established. Their condition is
ingeniously compared by him to that of a supposititious son, who has
made the discovery that his reputed parents are not his real ones, and,
in consequence, they have lost their authority over him.


