Perhaps you may remember some one saying at the beginning of our
discussion that the unjust man was profited if he had the reputation of
justice. Now that we know the nature of justice and injustice, let us
make an image of the soul, which will personify his words. First of all,
fashion a multitudinous beast, having a ring of heads of all manner of
animals, tame and wild, and able to produce and change them at pleasure.
Suppose now another form of a lion, and another of a man; the second
smaller than the first, the third than the second; join them together
and cover them with a human skin, in which they are completely
concealed. When this has been done, let us tell the supporter of
injustice that he is feeding up the beasts and starving the man. The
maintainer of justice, on the other hand, is trying to strengthen the
man; he is nourishing the gentle principle within him, and making an
alliance with the lion heart, in order that he may be able to keep down
the many-headed hydra, and bring all into unity with each other and
with themselves. Thus in every point of view, whether in relation to
pleasure, honour, or advantage, the just man is right, and the unjust
wrong.

But now, let us reason with the unjust, who is not intentionally in
error. Is not the noble that which subjects the beast to the man, or
rather to the God in man; the ignoble, that which subjects the man to
the beast? And if so, who would receive gold on condition that he was to
degrade the noblest part of himself under the worst?--who would sell his
son or daughter into the hands of brutal and evil men, for any amount
of money? And will he sell his own fairer and diviner part without any
compunction to the most godless and foul? Would he not be worse than
Eriphyle, who sold her husband's life for a necklace? And intemperance
is the letting loose of the multiform monster, and pride and sullenness
are the growth and increase of the lion and serpent element, while
luxury and effeminacy are caused by a too great relaxation of spirit.
Flattery and meanness again arise when the spirited element is subjected
to avarice, and the lion is habituated to become a monkey. The real
disgrace of handicraft arts is, that those who are engaged in them have
to flatter, instead of mastering their desires; therefore we say that
they should be placed under the control of the better principle in
another because they have none in themselves; not, as Thrasymachus
imagined, to the injury of the subjects, but for their good. And our
intention in educating the young, is to give them self-control; the
law desires to nurse up in them a higher principle, and when they have
acquired this, they may go their ways.

'What, then, shall a man profit, if he gain the whole world' and become
more and more wicked? Or what shall he profit by escaping discovery, if
the concealment of evil prevents the cure? If he had been punished,
the brute within him would have been silenced, and the gentler element
liberated; and he would have united temperance, justice, and wisdom in
his soul--a union better far than any combination of bodily gifts. The
man of understanding will honour knowledge above all; in the next
place he will keep under his body, not only for the sake of health and
strength, but in order to attain the most perfect harmony of body
and soul. In the acquisition of riches, too, he will aim at order and
harmony; he will not desire to heap up wealth without measure, but he
will fear that the increase of wealth will disturb the constitution of
his own soul. For the same reason he will only accept such honours as
will make him a better man; any others he will decline. 'In that case,'
said he, 'he will never be a politician.' Yes, but he will, in his own
city; though probably not in his native country, unless by some divine
accident. 'You mean that he will be a citizen of the ideal city, which
has no place upon earth.' But in heaven, I replied, there is a pattern
of such a city, and he who wishes may order his life after that image.
Whether such a state is or ever will be matters not; he will act
according to that pattern and no other...

The most noticeable points in the 9th Book of the Republic are:--(1) the
account of pleasure; (2) the number of the interval which divides the
king from the tyrant; (3) the pattern which is in heaven.

1. Plato's account of pleasure is remarkable for moderation, and in
this respect contrasts with the later Platonists and the views which are
attributed to them by Aristotle. He is not, like the Cynics, opposed
to all pleasure, but rather desires that the several parts of the
soul shall have their natural satisfaction; he even agrees with the
Epicureans in describing pleasure as something more than the absence of
pain. This is proved by the circumstance that there are pleasures which
have no antecedent pains (as he also remarks in the Philebus), such as
the pleasures of smell, and also the pleasures of hope and anticipation.
In the previous book he had made the distinction between necessary
and unnecessary pleasure, which is repeated by Aristotle, and he now
observes that there are a further class of 'wild beast' pleasures,
corresponding to Aristotle's (Greek). He dwells upon the relative and
unreal character of sensual pleasures and the illusion which arises out
of the contrast of pleasure and pain, pointing out the superiority of
the pleasures of reason, which are at rest, over the fleeting pleasures
of sense and emotion. The pre-eminence of royal pleasure is shown by
the fact that reason is able to form a judgment of the lower pleasures,
while the two lower parts of the soul are incapable of judging the
pleasures of reason. Thus, in his treatment of pleasure, as in many
other subjects, the philosophy of Plato is 'sawn up into quantities' by
Aristotle; the analysis which was originally made by him became in the
next generation the foundation of further technical distinctions. Both
in Plato and Aristotle we note the illusion under which the ancients
fell of regarding the transience of pleasure as a proof of its
unreality, and of confounding the permanence of the intellectual
pleasures with the unchangeableness of the knowledge from which they are
derived. Neither do we like to admit that the pleasures of knowledge,
though more elevating, are not more lasting than other pleasures,
and are almost equally dependent on the accidents of our bodily state
(Introduction to Philebus).

2. The number of the interval which separates the king from the tyrant,
and royal from tyrannical pleasures, is 729, the cube of 9. Which Plato
characteristically designates as a number concerned with human life,
because NEARLY equivalent to the number of days and nights in the
year. He is desirous of proclaiming that the interval between them is
immeasurable, and invents a formula to give expression to his idea.
Those who spoke of justice as a cube, of virtue as an art of measuring
(Prot.), saw no inappropriateness in conceiving the soul under the
figure of a line, or the pleasure of the tyrant as separated from the
pleasure of the king by the numerical interval of 729. And in modern
times we sometimes use metaphorically what Plato employed as a
philosophical formula. 'It is not easy to estimate the loss of the
tyrant, except perhaps in this way,' says Plato. So we might say, that
although the life of a good man is not to be compared to that of a bad
man, yet you may measure the difference between them by valuing one
minute of the one at an hour of the other ('One day in thy courts is
better than a thousand'), or you might say that 'there is an infinite
difference.' But this is not so much as saying, in homely phrase, 'They
are a thousand miles asunder.' And accordingly Plato finds the natural
vehicle of his thoughts in a progression of numbers; this arithmetical
formula he draws out with the utmost seriousness, and both here and in
the number of generation seems to find an additional proof of the truth
of his speculation in forming the number into a geometrical figure; just
as persons in our own day are apt to fancy that a statement is verified
when it has been only thrown into an abstract form. In speaking of the
number 729 as proper to human life, he probably intended to intimate
that one year of the tyrannical = 12 hours of the royal life.

The simple observation that the comparison of two similar solids
is effected by the comparison of the cubes of their sides, is the
mathematical groundwork of this fanciful expression. There is some
difficulty in explaining the steps by which the number 729 is obtained;
the oligarch is removed in the third degree from the royal and
aristocratical, and the tyrant in the third degree from the
oligarchical; but we have to arrange the terms as the sides of a square
and to count the oligarch twice over, thus reckoning them not as = 5 but
as = 9. The square of 9 is passed lightly over as only a step towards
the cube.

3. Towards the close of the Republic, Plato seems to be more and more
convinced of the ideal character of his own speculations. At the end of
the 9th Book the pattern which is in heaven takes the place of the
city of philosophers on earth. The vision which has received form and
substance at his hands, is now discovered to be at a distance. And yet
this distant kingdom is also the rule of man's life. ('Say not lo! here,
or lo! there, for the kingdom of God is within you.') Thus a note
is struck which prepares for the revelation of a future life in the
following Book. But the future life is present still; the ideal of
politics is to be realized in the individual.

