The point which has to be considered, is the origin of this corruption
in nature. Every one will admit that the philosopher, in our description
of him, is a rare being. But what numberless causes tend to destroy
these rare beings! There is no good thing which may not be a cause of
evil--health, wealth, strength, rank, and the virtues themselves,
when placed under unfavourable circumstances. For as in the animal or
vegetable world the strongest seeds most need the accompaniment of good
air and soil, so the best of human characters turn out the worst when
they fall upon an unsuitable soil; whereas weak natures hardly ever
do any considerable good or harm; they are not the stuff out of which
either great criminals or great heroes are made. The philosopher follows
the same analogy: he is either the best or the worst of all men. Some
persons say that the Sophists are the corrupters of youth; but is not
public opinion the real Sophist who is everywhere present--in those very
persons, in the assembly, in the courts, in the camp, in the applauses
and hisses of the theatre re-echoed by the surrounding hills? Will not
a young man's heart leap amid these discordant sounds? and will any
education save him from being carried away by the torrent? Nor is this
all. For if he will not yield to opinion, there follows the gentle
compulsion of exile or death. What principle of rival Sophists or
anybody else can overcome in such an unequal contest? Characters there
may be more than human, who are exceptions--God may save a man, but not
his own strength. Further, I would have you consider that the hireling
Sophist only gives back to the world their own opinions; he is the
keeper of the monster, who knows how to flatter or anger him, and
observes the meaning of his inarticulate grunts. Good is what pleases
him, evil what he dislikes; truth and beauty are determined only by
the taste of the brute. Such is the Sophist's wisdom, and such is the
condition of those who make public opinion the test of truth, whether in
art or in morals. The curse is laid upon them of being and doing what
it approves, and when they attempt first principles the failure is
ludicrous. Think of all this and ask yourself whether the world is more
likely to be a believer in the unity of the idea, or in the multiplicity
of phenomena. And the world if not a believer in the idea cannot be a
philosopher, and must therefore be a persecutor of philosophers. There
is another evil:--the world does not like to lose the gifted nature, and
so they flatter the young (Alcibiades) into a magnificent opinion of his
own capacity; the tall, proper youth begins to expand, and is dreaming
of kingdoms and empires. If at this instant a friend whispers to
him, 'Now the gods lighten thee; thou art a great fool' and must be
educated--do you think that he will listen? Or suppose a better sort of
man who is attracted towards philosophy, will they not make Herculean
efforts to spoil and corrupt him? Are we not right in saying that the
love of knowledge, no less than riches, may divert him? Men of this
class (Critias) often become politicians--they are the authors of
great mischief in states, and sometimes also of great good. And thus
philosophy is deserted by her natural protectors, and others enter in
and dishonour her. Vulgar little minds see the land open and rush from
the prisons of the arts into her temple. A clever mechanic having a
soul coarse as his body, thinks that he will gain caste by becoming her
suitor. For philosophy, even in her fallen estate, has a dignity of her
own--and he, like a bald little blacksmith's apprentice as he is, having
made some money and got out of durance, washes and dresses himself as a
bridegroom and marries his master's daughter. What will be the issue of
such marriages? Will they not be vile and bastard, devoid of truth
and nature? 'They will.' Small, then, is the remnant of genuine
philosophers; there may be a few who are citizens of small states, in
which politics are not worth thinking of, or who have been detained by
Theages' bridle of ill health; for my own case of the oracular sign is
almost unique, and too rare to be worth mentioning. And these few when
they have tasted the pleasures of philosophy, and have taken a look at
that den of thieves and place of wild beasts, which is human life,
will stand aside from the storm under the shelter of a wall, and try to
preserve their own innocence and to depart in peace. 'A great work, too,
will have been accomplished by them.' Great, yes, but not the greatest;
for man is a social being, and can only attain his highest development
in the society which is best suited to him.

Enough, then, of the causes why philosophy has such an evil name.
Another question is, Which of existing states is suited to her? Not one
of them; at present she is like some exotic seed which degenerates in
a strange soil; only in her proper state will she be shown to be of
heavenly growth. 'And is her proper state ours or some other?' Ours in
all points but one, which was left undetermined. You may remember our
saying that some living mind or witness of the legislator was needed in
states. But we were afraid to enter upon a subject of such difficulty,
and now the question recurs and has not grown easier:--How may
philosophy be safely studied? Let us bring her into the light of day,
and make an end of the inquiry.

In the first place, I say boldly that nothing can be worse than the
present mode of study. Persons usually pick up a little philosophy in
early youth, and in the intervals of business, but they never master the
real difficulty, which is dialectic. Later, perhaps, they occasionally
go to a lecture on philosophy. Years advance, and the sun of philosophy,
unlike that of Heracleitus, sets never to rise again. This order of
education should be reversed; it should begin with gymnastics in youth,
and as the man strengthens, he should increase the gymnastics of
his soul. Then, when active life is over, let him finally return to
philosophy. 'You are in earnest, Socrates, but the world will be equally
earnest in withstanding you--no more than Thrasymachus.' Do not make a
quarrel between Thrasymachus and me, who were never enemies and are
now good friends enough. And I shall do my best to convince him and
all mankind of the truth of my words, or at any rate to prepare for
the future when, in another life, we may again take part in similar
discussions. 'That will be a long time hence.' Not long in comparison
with eternity. The many will probably remain incredulous, for they
have never seen the natural unity of ideas, but only artificial
juxtapositions; not free and generous thoughts, but tricks of
controversy and quips of law;--a perfect man ruling in a perfect state,
even a single one they have not known. And we foresaw that there was no
chance of perfection either in states or individuals until a necessity
was laid upon philosophers--not the rogues, but those whom we called
the useless class--of holding office; or until the sons of kings were
inspired with a true love of philosophy. Whether in the infinity of
past time there has been, or is in some distant land, or ever will be
hereafter, an ideal such as we have described, we stoutly maintain
that there has been, is, and will be such a state whenever the Muse of
philosophy rules. Will you say that the world is of another mind? O, my
friend, do not revile the world! They will soon change their opinion
if they are gently entreated, and are taught the true nature of the
philosopher. Who can hate a man who loves him? Or be jealous of one who
has no jealousy? Consider, again, that the many hate not the true but
the false philosophers--the pretenders who force their way in without
invitation, and are always speaking of persons and not of principles,
which is unlike the spirit of philosophy. For the true philosopher
despises earthly strife; his eye is fixed on the eternal order in
accordance with which he moulds himself into the Divine image (and not
himself only, but other men), and is the creator of the virtues private
as well as public. When mankind see that the happiness of states is only
to be found in that image, will they be angry with us for attempting
to delineate it? 'Certainly not. But what will be the process of
delineation?' The artist will do nothing until he has made a tabula
rasa; on this he will inscribe the constitution of a state, glancing
often at the divine truth of nature, and from that deriving the godlike
among men, mingling the two elements, rubbing out and painting in,
until there is a perfect harmony or fusion of the divine and human. But
perhaps the world will doubt the existence of such an artist. What will
they doubt? That the philosopher is a lover of truth, having a nature
akin to the best?--and if they admit this will they still quarrel with
us for making philosophers our kings? 'They will be less disposed to
quarrel.' Let us assume then that they are pacified. Still, a person may
hesitate about the probability of the son of a king being a philosopher.
And we do not deny that they are very liable to be corrupted; but yet
surely in the course of ages there might be one exception--and one
is enough. If one son of a king were a philosopher, and had obedient
citizens, he might bring the ideal polity into being. Hence we conclude
that our laws are not only the best, but that they are also possible,
though not free from difficulty.


