The modern antagonist of the equality of the sexes would argue that the
differences between men and women are not confined to the single point
urged by Plato; that sensibility, gentleness, grace, are the qualities
of women, while energy, strength, higher intelligence, are to be looked
for in men. And the criticism is just: the differences affect the whole
nature, and are not, as Plato supposes, confined to a single point. But
neither can we say how far these differences are due to education and
the opinions of mankind, or physically inherited from the habits and
opinions of former generations. Women have been always taught, not
exactly that they are slaves, but that they are in an inferior position,
which is also supposed to have compensating advantages; and to this
position they have conformed. It is also true that the physical form may
easily change in the course of generations through the mode of life; and
the weakness or delicacy, which was once a matter of opinion, may become
a physical fact. The characteristics of sex vary greatly in different
countries and ranks of society, and at different ages in the same
individuals. Plato may have been right in denying that there was any
ultimate difference in the sexes of man other than that which exists in
animals, because all other differences may be conceived to disappear in
other states of society, or under different circumstances of life and
training.

The first wave having been passed, we proceed to the second--community
of wives and children. 'Is it possible? Is it desirable?' For as Glaucon
intimates, and as we far more strongly insist, 'Great doubts may
be entertained about both these points.' Any free discussion of the
question is impossible, and mankind are perhaps right in not allowing
the ultimate bases of social life to be examined. Few of us can safely
enquire into the things which nature hides, any more than we can
dissect our own bodies. Still, the manner in which Plato arrived at his
conclusions should be considered. For here, as Mr. Grote has remarked,
is a wonderful thing, that one of the wisest and best of men should have
entertained ideas of morality which are wholly at variance with our
own. And if we would do Plato justice, we must examine carefully the
character of his proposals. First, we may observe that the relations of
the sexes supposed by him are the reverse of licentious: he seems rather
to aim at an impossible strictness. Secondly, he conceives the family
to be the natural enemy of the state; and he entertains the serious
hope that an universal brotherhood may take the place of private
interests--an aspiration which, although not justified by experience,
has possessed many noble minds. On the other hand, there is no sentiment
or imagination in the connections which men and women are supposed by
him to form; human beings return to the level of the animals, neither
exalting to heaven, nor yet abusing the natural instincts. All that
world of poetry and fancy which the passion of love has called forth
in modern literature and romance would have been banished by Plato. The
arrangements of marriage in the Republic are directed to one object--the
improvement of the race. In successive generations a great development
both of bodily and mental qualities might be possible. The analogy of
animals tends to show that mankind can within certain limits receive a
change of nature. And as in animals we should commonly choose the best
for breeding, and destroy the others, so there must be a selection made
of the human beings whose lives are worthy to be preserved.

We start back horrified from this Platonic ideal, in the belief, first,
that the higher feelings of humanity are far too strong to be crushed
out; secondly, that if the plan could be carried into execution we
should be poorly recompensed by improvements in the breed for the loss
of the best things in life. The greatest regard for the weakest and
meanest of human beings--the infant, the criminal, the insane, the
idiot, truly seems to us one of the noblest results of Christianity. We
have learned, though as yet imperfectly, that the individual man has an
endless value in the sight of God, and that we honour Him when we honour
the darkened and disfigured image of Him (Laws). This is the lesson
which Christ taught in a parable when He said, 'Their angels do always
behold the face of My Father which is in heaven.' Such lessons are only
partially realized in any age; they were foreign to the age of Plato, as
they have very different degrees of strength in different countries or
ages of the Christian world. To the Greek the family was a religious and
customary institution binding the members together by a tie inferior
in strength to that of friendship, and having a less solemn and sacred
sound than that of country. The relationship which existed on the lower
level of custom, Plato imagined that he was raising to the higher level
of nature and reason; while from the modern and Christian point of view
we regard him as sanctioning murder and destroying the first principles
of morality.

The great error in these and similar speculations is that the difference
between man and the animals is forgotten in them. The human being
is regarded with the eye of a dog- or bird-fancier, or at best of a
slave-owner; the higher or human qualities are left out. The breeder
of animals aims chiefly at size or speed or strength; in a few cases at
courage or temper; most often the fitness of the animal for food is the
great desideratum. But mankind are not bred to be eaten, nor yet for
their superiority in fighting or in running or in drawing carts. Neither
does the improvement of the human race consist merely in the increase
of the bones and flesh, but in the growth and enlightenment of the mind.
Hence there must be 'a marriage of true minds' as well as of bodies, of
imagination and reason as well as of lusts and instincts. Men and women
without feeling or imagination are justly called brutes; yet Plato
takes away these qualities and puts nothing in their place, not even
the desire of a noble offspring, since parents are not to know their own
children. The most important transaction of social life, he who is the
idealist philosopher converts into the most brutal. For the pair are to
have no relation to one another, except at the hymeneal festival; their
children are not theirs, but the state's; nor is any tie of affection to
unite them. Yet here the analogy of the animals might have saved
Plato from a gigantic error, if he had 'not lost sight of his own
illustration.' For the 'nobler sort of birds and beasts' nourish and
protect their offspring and are faithful to one another.


