The first part of their journey was performed in too melancholy a
disposition to be otherwise than tedious and unpleasant. But as they
drew towards the end of it, their interest in the appearance of a
country which they were to inhabit overcame their dejection, and a
view of Barton Valley as they entered it gave them cheerfulness. It
was a pleasant fertile spot, well wooded, and rich in pasture. After
winding along it for more than a mile, they reached their own house. A
small green court was the whole of its demesne in front; and a neat
wicket gate admitted them into it.

As a house, Barton Cottage, though small, was comfortable and compact;
but as a cottage it was defective, for the building was regular, the
roof was tiled, the window shutters were not painted green, nor were
the walls covered with honeysuckles. A narrow passage led directly
through the house into the garden behind. On each side of the entrance
was a sitting room, about sixteen feet square; and beyond them were
the offices and the stairs. Four bedrooms and two garrets formed the
rest of the house. It had not been built many years and was in good
repair. In comparison of Norland, it was poor and small indeed!--but
the tears which recollection called forth as they entered the house
were soon dried away. They were cheered by the joy of the servants on
their arrival, and each for the sake of the others resolved to appear
happy. It was very early in September; the season was fine, and from
first seeing the place under the advantage of good weather, they
received an impression in its favour which was of material service in
recommending it to their lasting approbation.

The situation of the house was good. High hills rose immediately
behind, and at no great distance on each side; some of which were open
downs, the others cultivated and woody. The village of Barton was
chiefly on one of these hills, and formed a pleasant view from the
cottage windows. The prospect in front was more extensive; it
commanded the whole of the valley, and reached into the country
beyond. The hills which surrounded the cottage terminated the valley
in that direction; under another name, and in another course, it
branched out again between two of the steepest of them.

With the size and furniture of the house Mrs. Dashwood was upon the
whole well satisfied; for though her former style of life rendered
many additions to the latter indispensable, yet to add and improve was
a delight to her; and she had at this time ready money enough to
supply all that was wanted of greater elegance to the apartments. "As
for the house itself, to be sure," said she, "it is too small for our
family, but we will make ourselves tolerably comfortable for the
present, as it is too late in the year for improvements. Perhaps in
the spring, if I have plenty of money, as I dare say I shall, we may
think about building. These parlors are both too small for such
parties of our friends as I hope to see often collected here; and I
have some thoughts of throwing the passage into one of them with
perhaps a part of the other, and so leave the remainder of that other
for an entrance; this, with a new drawing room which may be easily
added, and a bed-chamber and garret above, will make it a very snug
little cottage. I could wish the stairs were handsome. But one must
not expect every thing; though I suppose it would be no difficult
matter to widen them. I shall see how much I am before-hand with the
world in the spring, and we will plan our improvements accordingly."

In the mean time, till all these alterations could be made from the
savings of an income of five hundred a-year by a woman who never
saved in her life, they were wise enough to be contented with the
house as it was; and each of them was busy in arranging their
particular concerns, and endeavoring, by placing around them books and
other possessions, to form themselves a home. Marianne's pianoforte
was unpacked and properly disposed of; and Elinor's drawings were
affixed to the walls of their sitting room.

In such employments as these they were interrupted soon after
breakfast the next day by the entrance of their landlord, who called
to welcome them to Barton, and to offer them every accommodation from
his own house and garden in which theirs might at present be
deficient. Sir John Middleton was a good looking man about forty. He
had formerly visited at Stanhill, but it was too long for his young
cousins to remember him. His countenance was thoroughly good-humoured;
and his manners were as friendly as the style of his letter. Their
arrival seemed to afford him real satisfaction, and their comfort to
be an object of real solicitude to him. He said much of his earnest
desire of their living in the most sociable terms with his family, and
pressed them so cordially to dine at Barton Park every day till they
were better settled at home, that, though his entreaties were carried
to a point of perseverance beyond civility, they could not give
offence. His kindness was not confined to words; for within an hour
after he left them, a large basket full of garden stuff and fruit
arrived from the park, which was followed before the end of the day by
a present of game. He insisted, moreover, on conveying all their
letters to and from the post for them, and would not be denied the
satisfaction of sending them his newspaper every day.

Lady Middleton had sent a very civil message by him, denoting her
intention of waiting on Mrs. Dashwood as soon as she could be assured
that her visit would be no inconvenience; and as this message was
answered by an invitation equally polite, her ladyship was introduced
to them the next day.

