Saying these words he wept no longer; he was seized by that short and
rapid madness known to the men of Picardy; he sprang to the wall, and if
I had not caught him, he would have dashed out his brains against it.

"Wait for your trial," I said. "You are innocent, you will certainly be
acquitted; think of your mother."

"My mother!" he cried frantically, "she will hear of the accusation
before she hears anything else,--it is always so in little towns; and
the shock will kill her. Besides, I am not innocent. Must I tell you the
whole truth? I feel that I have lost the virginity of my conscience."

After that terrible avowal he sat down, crossed his arms on his breast,
bowed his head upon it, gazing gloomily on the ground. At this instant
the turnkey came to ask me to return to my room. Grieved to leave my
companion at a moment when his discouragement was so deep, I pressed him
in my arms with friendship, saying:--

"Have patience; all may yet go well. If the voice of an honest man can
still your doubts, believe that I esteem you and trust you. Accept my
friendship, and rest upon my heart, if you cannot find peace in your
own."

The next morning a corporal's guard came to fetch the young surgeon at
nine o'clock. Hearing the noise made by the soldiers, I stationed myself
at my window. As the prisoner crossed the courtyard, he cast his eyes up
to me. Never shall I forget that look, full of thoughts, presentiments,
resignation, and I know not what sad, melancholy grace. It was, as it
were, a silent but intelligible last will by which a man bequeathed his
lost existence to his only friend. The night must have been very
hard, very solitary for him; and yet, perhaps, the pallor of his face
expressed a stoicism gathered from some new sense of self-respect.
Perhaps he felt that his remorse had purified him, and believed that he
had blotted out his fault by his anguish and his shame. He now walked
with a firm step, and since the previous evening he had washed away the
blood with which he was, involuntarily, stained.

"My hands must have dabbled in it while I slept, for I am always a
restless sleeper," he had said to me in tones of horrible despair.

I learned that he was on his way to appear before the council of
war. The division was to march on the following morning, and the
commanding-officer did not wish to leave Andernach without inquiry into
the crime on the spot where it had been committed. I remained in the
utmost anxiety during the time the council lasted. At last, about
mid-day, Prosper Magnan was brought back. I was then taking my usual
walk; he saw me, and came and threw himself into my arms.

"Lost!" he said, "lost, without hope! Here, to all the world, I am a
murderer." He raised his head proudly. "This injustice restores to me my
innocence. My life would always have been wretched; my death leaves me
without reproach. But is there a future?"

The whole eighteenth century was in that sudden question. He remained
thoughtful.

"Tell me," I said to him, "how you answered. What did they ask you? Did
you not relate the simple facts as you told them to me?"

He looked at me fixedly for a moment; then, after that awful pause, he
answered with feverish excitement:--

"First they asked me, 'Did you leave the inn during the night?' I said,
'Yes.' 'How?' I answered, 'By the window.' 'Then you must have taken
great precautions; the innkeeper heard no noise.' I was stupefied.
The sailors said they saw me walking, first to Andernach, then to the
forest. I made many trips, they said, no doubt to bury the gold and
diamonds. The valise had not been found. My remorse still held me dumb.
When I wanted to speak, a pitiless voice cried out to me, _'You meant
to commit that crime!'_ All was against me, even myself. They asked me
about my comrade, and I completely exonerated him. Then they said to me:
'The crime must lie between you, your comrade, the innkeeper, and
his wife. This morning all the windows and doors were found securely
fastened.' At those words," continued the poor fellow, "I had neither
voice, nor strength, nor soul to answer. More sure of my comrade than
I could be of myself, I could not accuse him. I saw that we were both
thought equally guilty of the murder, and that I was considered the most
clumsy. I tried to explain the crime by somnambulism, and so protect my
friend; but there I rambled and contradicted myself. No, I am lost.
I read my condemnation in the eyes of my judges. They smiled
incredulously. All is over. No more uncertainty. To-morrow I shall be
shot. I am not thinking of myself," he went on after a pause, "but of my
poor mother." Then he stopped, looked up to heaven, and shed no tears;
his eyes were dry and strongly convulsed. "Frederic--"

["Ah! true," cried Monsieur Hermann, with an air of triumph. "Yes, the
other's name was Frederic, Frederic! I remember now!"

My neighbor touched my foot, and made me a sign to look at Monsieur
Taillefer. The former purveyor had negligently dropped his hand over his
eyes, but between the interstices of his fingers we thought we caught a
darkling flame proceeding from them.

"Hein?" she said in my ear, "what if his name were Frederic?"

I answered with a glance, which said to her: "Silence!"

Hermann continued:]

"Frederic!" cried the young surgeon, "Frederic basely deserted me. He
must have been afraid. Perhaps he is still hidden in the inn, for our
horses were both in the courtyard this morning. What an incomprehensible
mystery!" he went on, after a moment's silence. "Somnambulism!
somnambulism? I never had but one attack in my life, and that was when
I was six years old. Must I go from this earth," he cried, striking the
ground with his foot, "carrying with me all there is of friendship in
the world? Shall I die a double death, doubting a fraternal love begun
when we were only five years old, and continued through school and
college? Where is Frederic?"

He wept. Can it be that we cling more to a sentiment than to life?

"Let us go in," he said; "I prefer to be in my cell. I do not wish to
be seen weeping. I shall go courageously to death, but I cannot play the
heroic at all moments; I own I regret my beautiful young life. All last
night I could not sleep; I remembered the scenes of my childhood; I
fancied I was running in the fields. Ah! I had a future," he said,
suddenly interrupting himself; "and now, twelve men, a sub-lieutenant
shouting 'Carry-arms, aim, fire!' a roll of drums, and infamy! that's my
future now. Oh! there must be a God, or it would all be too senseless."

Then he took me in his arms and pressed me to him with all his strength.

"You are the last man, the last friend to whom I can show my soul. You
will be set at liberty, you will see your mother! I don't know whether
you are rich or poor, but no matter! you are all the world to me. They
won't fight always, 'ceux-ci.' Well, when there's peace, will you go to
Beauvais? If my mother has survived the fatal news of my death, you will
find her there. Say to her the comforting words, 'He was innocent!' She
will believe you. I am going to write to her; but you must take her my
last look; you must tell her that you were the last man whose hand
I pressed. Oh, she'll love you, the poor woman! you, my last friend.
Here," he said, after a moment's silence, during which he was overcome
by the weight of his recollections, "all, officers and soldiers, are
unknown to me; I am an object of horror to them. If it were not for you
my innocence would be a secret between God and myself."

I swore to sacredly fulfil his last wishes. My words, the emotion I
showed touched him. Soon after that the soldiers came to take him again
before the council of war. He was condemned to death. I am ignorant of
the formalities that followed or accompanied this judgment, nor do I
know whether the young surgeon defended his life or not; but he expected
to be executed on the following day, and he spent the night in writing
to his mother.


