"Tullia was irresistible; she twisted du Bruel round her fingers, the
sky grew blue again, the evening was glorious. And ingenious writer
of plays as he is, he never so much as saw that his wife had buried a
trouble out of sight.

"'Such is life, my dear fellow,' he said to me, 'ups and downs and
contrasts.'

"'Especially life off the stage,' I put in.

"'That is just what I mean,' he continued. 'Why, but for these violent
emotions, one would be bored to death! Ah! that woman has the gift of
rousing me.'

"We went to the Varietes after dinner; but before we left the house
I slipped into du Bruel's room, and on a shelf among a pile of waste
papers found the copy of the _Petites-Affiches_, in which, agreeably to
the reformed law, notice of the purchase of the house was inserted. The
words stared me in the face--'At the request of Jean Francois du Bruel
and Claudine Chaffaroux, his wife----' _Here_ was the explanation of the
whole matter. I offered my arm to Claudine, and allowed the guests to
descend the stairs in front of us. When we were alone--'If I were La
Palferine,' I said, 'I would not break an appointment.'

"Gravely she laid her finger on her lips. She leant on my arm as we went
downstairs, and looked at me with almost something like happiness in
her eyes because I knew La Palferine. Can you see the first idea that
occurred to her? She thought of making a spy of me, but I turned her off
with the light jesting talk of Bohemia.

"A month later, after a first performance of one of du Bruel's plays,
we met in the vestibule of the theatre. It was raining; I went to call
a cab. We had been delayed for a few minutes, so that there were no cabs
in sight. Claudine scolded du Bruel soundly; and as we rolled through
the streets (for she set me down at Florine's), she continued the
quarrel with a series of most mortifying remarks.

"'What is this about?' I inquired.

"'Oh, my dear fellow, she blames me for allowing you to run out for a
cab, and thereupon proceeds to wish for a carriage.'

"'As a dancer,' said she, 'I have never been accustomed to use my feet
except on the boards. If you have any spirit, you will turn out four
more plays or so in a year; you will make up your mind that succeed they
must, when you think of the end in view, and that your wife will not
walk in the mud. It is a shame that I should have to ask for it. You
ought to have guessed my continual discomfort during the five years
since I married you.'

"'I am quite willing,' returned du Bruel. 'But we shall ruin ourselves.'

"'If you run into debt,' she said, 'my uncle's money will clear it off
some day.'

"'You are quite capable of leaving me the debts and taking the
property.'

"'Oh! is that the way you take it?' retorted she. 'I have nothing more
to say to you; such a speech stops my mouth.'

"Whereupon du Bruel poured out his soul in excuses and protestations of
love. Not a word did she say. He took her hands, she allowed him to take
them; they were like ice, like a dead woman's hands. Tullia, you can
understand, was playing to admiration the part of corpse that women
can play to show you that they refuse their consent to anything and
everything; that for you they are suppressing soul, spirit, and life,
and regard themselves as beasts of burden. Nothing so provokes a man
with a heart as this strategy. Women can only use it with those who
worship them.

"She turned to me. 'Do you suppose,' she said scornfully, 'that a Count
would have uttered such an insult even if the thought had entered his
mind? For my misfortune I have lived with dukes, ambassadors, and great
lords, and I know their ways. How intolerable it makes bourgeois life!
After all, a playwright is not a Rastignac nor a Rhetore----'

"Du Bruel looked ghastly at this. Two days afterwards we met in the
_foyer_ at the Opera, and took a few turns together. The conversation
fell on Tullia.

"'Do not take my ravings on the boulevard too seriously,' said he; 'I
have a violent temper.'

"For two winters I was a tolerably frequent visitor at du Bruel's house,
and I followed Claudine's tactics closely. She had a splendid carriage.
Du Bruel entered public life; she made him abjure his Royalist opinions.
He rallied himself; he took his place again in the administration; the
National Guard was discreetly canvassed, du Bruel was elected major, and
behaved so valorously in a street riot, that he was decorated with the
rosette of an officer of the Legion of Honor. He was appointed Master
of Requests and head of a department. Uncle Chaffaroux died and left his
niece forty thousand francs per annum, three-fourths of his fortune.
Du Bruel became a deputy; but beforehand, to save the necessity of
re-election, he secured his nomination to the Council of State. He
reprinted divers archaeological treatises, a couple of political
pamphlets, and a statistical work, by way of pretext for his appointment
to one of the obliging academies of the Institut. At this moment he is
a Commander of the Legion, and (after fishing in the troubled waters of
political intrigue) has quite recently been made a peer of France and a
count. As yet our friend does not venture to bear his honors; his wife
merely puts 'La Comtesse du Bruel' on her cards. The sometime
playwright has the Order of Leopold, the Order of Isabella, the cross of
Saint-Vladimir, second class, the Order of Civil Merit of Bavaria,
the Papal Order of the Golden Spur,--all the lesser orders, in short,
besides the Grand Cross.

"Three months ago Claudine drove to La Palferine's door in her splendid
carriage with its armorial bearings. Du Bruel's grandfather was a farmer
of taxes ennobled towards the end of Louis Quatorze's reign. Cherin
composed his coat-of-arms for him, so the Count's coronet looks not
amiss above a scutcheon innocent of Imperial absurdities. In this
way, in the short space of three years, Claudine had carried out the
programme laid down for her by the charming, light-hearted La Palferine.

"One day, just above a month ago, she climbed the miserable staircase to
her lover's lodging; climbed in her glory, dressed like a real countess
of the Faubourg Saint-Germain, to our friend's garret. La Palferine,
seeing her, said, 'You have made a peeress of yourself I know. But it
is too late, Claudine; every one is talking just now about the Southern
Cross, I should like it see it!'

"'I will get it for you.'

"La Palferine burst into a peal of Homeric laughter.

"'Most distinctly,' he returned, 'I do _not_ wish to have a woman as
ignorant as a carp for my mistress, a woman that springs like a flying
fish from the green-room of the Opera to Court, for I should like to see
you at the Court of the Citizen King.'

"She turned to me.

"'What is the Southern Cross?' she asked, in a sad, downcast voice.

"I was struck with admiration for this indomitable love, outdoing the
most ingenious marvels of fairy tales in real life--a love that would
spring over a precipice to find a roc's egg, or to gather the singing
flower. I explained that the Southern Cross was a nebulous constellation
even brighter than the Milky Way, arranged in the form of a cross, and
that it could only be seen in southern latitudes.

"'Very well, Charles, let us go,' said she.

"La Palferine, ferocious though he was, had tears in his eyes; but what
a look there was in Claudine's face, what a note in her voice! I have
seen nothing like the thing that followed, not even in the supreme touch
of a great actor's art; nothing to compare with her movement when she
saw the hard eyes softened in tears; Claudine sank upon her knees
and kissed La Palferine's pitiless hand. He raised her with his grand
manner, his 'Rusticoli air,' as he calls it--'There, child!' he said, 'I
will do something for you; I will put you--in my will.'

"Well," concluded Nathan, "I ask myself sometimes whether du Bruel is
really deceived. Truly there is nothing more comic, nothing stranger
than the sight of a careless young fellow ruling a married couple, his
slightest whims received as law, the weightiest decisions revoked at a
word from him. That dinner incident, as you can see, is repeated times
without number, it interferes with important matters. Still, but for
Claudine's caprices, du Bruel would be de Cursy still, one vaudevillist
among five hundred; whereas he is in the House of Peers."


"You will change the names, I hope!" said Nathan, addressing Mme. de la
Baudraye.

"I should think so! I have only set names to the masks for you. My dear
Nathan," she added in the poet's ear, "I know another case on which the
wife takes du Bruel's place."

"And the catastrophe?" queried Lousteau, returning just at the end of
Mme. de la Baudraye's story.

"I do not believe in catastrophes. One has to invent such good ones
to show that art is quite a match for chance; and nobody reads a book
twice, my friend, except for the details."

"But there is a catastrophe," persisted Nathan.

"What is it?"

"The Marquise de Rochefide is infatuated with Charles Edward. My story
excited her curiosity."

"Oh, unhappy woman!" cried Mme. de la Baudraye.

"Not so unhappy," said Nathan, "for Maxime de Trailles and La Palferine
have brought about a rupture between the Marquis and Mme. Schontz, and
they mean to make it up between Arthur and Beatrix."


