"'Is it true,' he asked, 'that Mlle. d'Orleans contributes such and such
a sum to this benevolent scheme started by her nephew? If so, it is very
gracious of her.'

"Now La Palferine had a servant, a little Savoyard, aged ten, who waited
on him without wages. La Palferine called him Father Anchises, and used
to say, 'I have never seen such a mixture of besotted foolishness
with great intelligence; he would go through fire and water for me; he
understands everything--and yet he cannot grasp the fact that I can do
nothing for him.'

"Anchises was despatched to a livery stable with instructions to hire
a handsome brougham with a man in livery behind it. By the time
the carriage arrived below, La Palferine had skilfully piloted the
conversation to the subject of the functions of his visitor, whom he has
since called 'the unmitigated misery man,' and learned the nature of his
duties and his stipend.

"'Do they allow you a carriage to go about the town in this way?'

"'Oh! no.'

"At that La Palferine and a friend who happened to be with him went
downstairs with the poor soul, and insisted on putting him into the
carriage. It was raining in torrents. La Palferine had thought of
everything. He offered to drive the official to the next house on
his list; and when the almoner came down again, he found the carriage
waiting for him at the door. The man in livery handed him a note written
in pencil:

  "'The carriage has been engaged for three days. Count Rusticoli
  de la Palferine is too happy to associate himself with Court
  charities by lending wings to Royal beneficence.'

"La Palferine now calls the civil list the uncivil list.

"He was once passionately loved by a lady of somewhat light conduct.
Antonia lived in the Rue du Helder; she had seen and been seen to some
extent, but at the time of her acquaintance with La Palferine she had
not yet 'an establishment.' Antonia was not wanting in the insolence of
old days, now degenerating into rudeness among women of her class. After
a fortnight of unmixed bliss, she was compelled, in the interest of
her civil list, to return to a less exclusive system; and La Palferine,
discovering a certain lack of sincerity in her dealings with him, sent
Madame Antonia a note which made her famous.

  "'MADAME,--Your conduct causes me much surprise and no less
  distress. Not content with rending my heart with your disdain, you
  have been so little thoughtful as to retain a toothbrush, which my
  means will not permit me to replace, my estates being mortgaged
  beyond their value.

  "'Adieu, too fair and too ungrateful friend! May we meet again in
  a better world.

                                                 "'CHARLES EDWARD.'"


"Assuredly (to avail ourselves yet further of Sainte-Beuve's Babylonish
dialect), this far outpasses the raillery of Sterne's _Sentimental
Journey_; it might be Scarron without his grossness. Nay, I do not know
but that Moliere in his lighter mood would not have said of it, as of
Cyrano de Bergerac's best--'This is mine.' Richelieu himself was not
more complete when he wrote to the princess waiting for him in the
Palais Royal--'Stay there, my queen, to charm the scullion lads.' At
the same time, Charles Edward's humor is less biting. I am not sure that
this kind of wit was known among the Greeks and Romans. Plato, possibly,
upon a closer inspection approaches it, but from the austere and musical
side--"

"No more of that jargon," the Marquise broke in, "in print it may be
endurable; but to have it grating upon my ears is a punishment which I
do not in the least deserve."

"He first met Claudine on this wise," continued Nathan. "It was one of
the unfilled days, when Youth is a burden to itself; days when youth,
reduced by the overweening presumption of Age to a condition of
potential energy and dejection, emerges therefrom (like Blondet under
the Restoration), either to get into mischief or to set about some
colossal piece of buffoonery, half excused by the very audacity of its
conception. La Palferine was sauntering, cane in hand, up and down the
pavement between the Rue de Grammont and the Rue de Richelieu, when in
the distance he descried a woman too elegantly dressed, covered, as he
phrased it, with a great deal of portable property, too expensive and
too carelessly worn for its owner to be other than a princess of the
court or of the stage, it was not easy at first to say which. But after
July 1830, in his opinion, there is no mistaking the indications--the
princess can only be a princess of the stage.

"The Count came up and walked by her side as if she had given him an
assignation. He followed her with a courteous persistence, a persistence
in good taste, giving the lady from time to time, and always at the
right moment, an authoritative glance, which compelled her to submit
to his escort. Anybody but La Palferine would have been frozen by his
reception, and disconcerted by the lady's first efforts to rid herself
of her cavalier, by her chilly air, her curt speeches; but no gravity,
with all the will in the world, could hold out long against La
Palferine's jesting replies. The fair stranger went into her milliner's
shop. Charles Edward followed, took a seat, and gave his opinions and
advice like a man that meant to pay. This coolness disturbed the lady.
She went out.

"On the stairs she spoke to her persecutor.

"'Monsieur, I am about to call upon one of my husband's relatives, an
elderly lady, Mme. de Bonfalot--'

"'Ah! Mme. de Bonfalot, charmed, I am sure. I am going there.'

"The pair accordingly went. Charles Edward came in with the lady, every
one believed that she had brought him with her. He took part in the
conversation, was lavish of his polished and brilliant wit. The visit
lengthened out. That was not what he wanted.

"'Madame,' he said, addressing the fair stranger, 'do not forget that
your husband is waiting for us, and only allowed us a quarter of an
hour.'

"Taken aback by such boldness (which, as you know, is never displeasing
to you women), led captive by the conqueror's glance, by the astute yet
candid air which Charles Edward can assume when he chooses, the lady
rose, took the arm of her self-constituted escort, and went downstairs,
but on the threshold she stopped to speak to him.

"'Monsieur, I like a joke----'

"'And so do I.'

"She laughed.

"'But this may turn to earnest,' he added; 'it only rests with you. I am
the Comte de la Palferine, and I am delighted that it is in my power to
lay my heart and my fortune at your feet.'

"La Palferine was at that time twenty-two years old. (This happened
in 1834.) Luckily for him, he was fashionably dressed. I can paint his
portrait for you in a few words. He was the living image of Louis XIII.,
with the same white forehead and gracious outline of the temples, the
same olive skin (that Italian olive tint which turns white where the
light falls on it), the brown hair worn rather long, the black 'royale,'
the grave and melancholy expression, for La Palferine's character and
exterior were amazingly at variance.

"At the sound of the name, and the sight of its owner, something like
a quiver thrilled through Claudine. La Palferine saw the vibration, and
shot a glance at her out of the dark depths of almond-shaped eyes with
purpled lids, and those faint lines about them which tell of pleasures
as costly as painful fatigue. With those eyes upon her, she said--'Your
address?'

"'What want of address!'

"'Oh, pshaw!' she said, smiling. 'A bird on the bough?'

"'Good-bye, madame, you are such a woman as I seek, but my fortune is
far from equaling my desire----'

"He bowed, and there and then left her. Two days later, by one of the
strange chances that can only happen in Paris, he had betaken himself to
a money-lending wardrobe dealer to sell such of his clothing as he could
spare. He was just receiving the price with an uneasy air, after long
chaffering, when the stranger lady passed and recognized him.

"'Once for all,' cried he to the bewildered wardrobe dealer, 'I tell you
I am not going to take your trumpet!'

"He pointed to a huge, much-dinted musical instrument, hanging up
outside against a background of uniforms, civil and military. Then,
proudly and impetuously, he followed the lady.

"From that great day of the trumpet these two understood one another to
admiration. Charles Edward's ideas on the subject of love are as sound
as possible. According to him, a man cannot love twice, there is but one
love in his lifetime, but that love is a deep and shoreless sea. It may
break in upon him at any time, as the grace of God found St. Paul; and a
man may live sixty years and never know love. Perhaps, to quote Heine's
superb phrase, it is 'the secret malady of the heart'--a sense of the
Infinite that there is within us, together with the revelation of the
ideal Beauty in its visible form. This love, in short, comprehends both
the creature and creation. But so long as there is no question of this
great poetical conception, the loves that cannot last can only be taken
lightly, as if they were in a manner snatches of song compared with Love
the epic.

"To Charles Edward the adventure brought neither the thunderbolt signal
of love's coming, nor yet that gradual revelation of an inward fairness
which draws two natures by degrees more and more strongly each to each.
For there are but two ways of love--love at first sight, doubtless akin
to the Highland 'second-sight,' and that slow fusion of two natures
which realizes Plato's 'man-woman.' But if Charles Edward did not love,
he was loved to distraction. Claudine found love made complete, body
and soul; in her, in short, La Palferine awakened the one passion of
her life; while for him Claudine was only a most charming mistress. The
Devil himself, a most potent magician certainly, with all hell at his
back, could never have changed the natures of these two unequal fires. I
dare affirm that Claudine not unfrequently bored Charles Edward.


