In the silence of the night, with her eyes fixed on the green silk
curtains which she no longer saw, the countess, forgetting the storm,
her husband, and her fears, recalled the days which seemed to her
longer than years, so full were they,--days when she loved, and was
beloved!--and the moment when, fearing her mother's sternness, she
had slipped one morning into her father's study to whisper her girlish
confidences on his knee, waiting for his smile at her caresses to say
in his ear, "Will you scold me if I tell you something?" Once more she
heard her father say, after a few questions in reply to which she spoke
for the first time of her love, "Well, well, my child, we will think
of it. If he studies well, if he fits himself to succeed me, if he
continues to please you, I will be on your side."

After that she had listened no longer; she had kissed her father, and,
knocking over his papers as she ran from the room, she flew to the great
linden-tree where, daily, before her formidable mother rose, she met
that charming cousin, Georges de Chaverny.

Faithfully the youth promised to study law and customs. He laid aside
the splendid trappings of the nobility of the sword to wear the sterner
costume of the magistracy.

"I like you better in black," she said.

It was a falsehood, but by that falsehood she comforted her lover for
having thrown his dagger to the winds. The memory of the little schemes
employed to deceive her mother, whose severity seemed great, brought
back to her the soulful joys of that innocent and mutual and sanctioned
love; sometimes a rendezvous beneath the linden, where speech could
be freer than before witnesses; sometimes a furtive clasp, or a stolen
kiss,--in short, all the naive instalments of a passion that did not
pass the bounds of modesty. Reliving in her vision those delightful days
when she seemed to have too much happiness, she fancied that she kissed,
in the void, that fine young face with the glowing eyes, that rosy
mouth that spoke so well of love. Yes, she had loved Chaverny, poor
apparently; but what treasures had she not discovered in that soul as
tender as it was strong!

Suddenly her father died. Chaverny did not succeed him. The flames
of civil war burst forth. By Chaverny's care she and her mother found
refuge in a little town of Lower Normandy. Soon the deaths of other
relatives made her one of the richest heiresses in France. Happiness
disappeared as wealth came to her. The savage and terrible face of Comte
d'Herouville, who asked her hand, rose before her like a thunder-cloud,
spreading its gloom over the smiling meadows so lately gilded by the
sun. The poor countess strove to cast from her memory the scenes of
weeping and despair brought about by her long resistance.

At last came an awful night when her mother, pale and dying, threw
herself at her daughter's feet. Jeanne could save Chaverny's life by
yielding; she yielded. It was night. The count, arriving bloody from
the battlefield was there; all was ready, the priest, the altar, the
torches! Jeanne belonged henceforth to misery. Scarcely had she time to
say to her young cousin who was set at liberty:--

"Georges, if you love me, never see me again!"

She heard the departing steps of her lover, whom, in truth, she never
saw again; but in the depths of her heart she still kept sacred his last
look which returned perpetually in her dreams and illumined them. Living
like a cat shut into a lion's cage, the young wife dreaded at all hours
the claws of the master which ever threatened her. She knew that in
order to be happy she must forget the past and think only of the future;
but there were days, consecrated to the memory of some vanished joy,
when she deliberately made it a crime to put on the gown she had worn on
the day she had seen her lover for the first time.

"I am not guilty," she said, "but if I seem guilty to the count it is as
if I were so. Perhaps I am! The Holy Virgin conceived without--"

She stopped. During this moment when her thoughts were misty and her
soul floated in a region of fantasy her naivete made her attribute to
that last look with which her lover transfixed her the occult power of
the visitation of the angel to the Mother of her Lord. This supposition,
worthy of the days of innocence to which her reverie had carried her
back, vanished before the memory of a conjugal scene more odious than
death. The poor countess could have no real doubt as to the legitimacy
of the child that stirred in her womb. The night of her marriage
reappeared to her in all the horror if its agony, bringing in its train
other such nights and sadder days.

"Ah! my poor Chaverny!" she cried, weeping, "you so respectful, so
gracious, YOU were always kind to me."

She turned her eyes to her husband as if to persuade herself that that
harsh face contained a promise of mercy, dearly brought. The count was
awake. His yellow eyes, clear as those of a tiger, glittered beneath
their tufted eyebrows and never had his glance been so incisive. The
countess, terrified at having encountered it, slid back under the great
counterpane and was motionless.

"Why are you weeping?" said the count, pulling away the covering which
hid his wife.

That voice, always a terror to her, had a specious softness at this
moment which seemed to her of good augury.


