"'The cut of his countenance is not reassuring,' said Maxime, beholding
the Sieur Denisart.

"And indeed the old soldier held himself upright as a steeple. His head
was remarkable for the amount of powder and pomatum bestowed upon it; he
looked almost like a postilion at a fancy ball. Underneath that felted
covering, moulded to the top of the wearer's cranium, appeared an
elderly profile, half-official, half-soldierly, with a comical
admixture of arrogance,--altogether something like caricatures of
the _Constitutionnel_. The sometime official finding that age, and
hair-powder, and the conformation of his spine made it impossible to
read a word without spectacles, sat displaying a very creditable expanse
of chest with all the pride of an old man with a mistress. Like old
General Montcornet, that pillar of the Vaudeville, he wore earrings.
Denisart was partial to blue; his roomy trousers and well-worn greatcoat
were both of blue cloth.

"'How long is it since that old fogy came here?' inquired Maxime,
thinking that he saw danger in the spectacles.

"'Oh, from the beginning,' returned Antonia, 'pretty nearly two months
ago now.'

"'Good," said Maxime to himself, 'Cerizet only came to me a month
ago.--Just get him to talk,' he added in Antonia's ear; 'I want to hear
his voice.'

"'Pshaw,' said she, 'that is not so easy. He never says a word to me.'

"'Then why does he come here?' demanded Maxime.

"'For a queer reason,' returned the fair Antonia. 'In the first place,
although he is sixty-nine, he has a fancy; and because he is sixty-nine,
he is as methodical as a clock face. Every day at five o'clock the old
gentleman goes to dine with _her_ in the Rue de la Victoire. (I am sorry
for her.) Then at six o'clock, he comes here, reads steadily at the
papers for four hours, and goes back at ten o'clock. Daddy Croizeau says
that he knows M. Denisart's motives, and approves his conduct; and in
his place, he would do the same. So I know exactly what to expect. If
ever I am Mme. Croizeau, I shall have four hours to myself between six
and ten o'clock.'

"Maxime looked through the directory, and found the following reassuring
item:

    "DENISART,* retired custom-house officer, Rue de la Victoire.

"His uneasiness vanished.

"Gradually the Sieur Denisart and the Sieur Croizeau began to exchange
confidences. Nothing so binds two men together as a similarity of
views in the matter of womankind. Daddy Croizeau went to dine with 'M.
Denisart's fair lady,' as he called her. And here I must make a somewhat
important observation.

"The reading-room had been paid for half in cash, half in bills signed
by the said Mlle. Chocardelle. The _quart d'heure de Rabelais_ arrived;
the Count had no money. So the first bill of three thousand francs was
met by the amiable coach-builder; that old scoundrel Denisart having
recommended him to secure himself with a mortgage on the reading-room.

"'For my own part,' said Denisart, 'I have seen pretty doings from
pretty women. So in all cases, even when I have lost my head, I am
always on my guard with a woman. There is this creature, for instance; I
am madly in love with her; but this is not her furniture; no, it belongs
to me. The lease is taken out in my name.'

"You know Maxime! He thought the coach-builder uncommonly green.
Croizeau might pay all three bills, and get nothing for a long while;
for Maxime felt more infatuated with Antonia than ever."

"I can well believe it," said La Palferine. "She is the _bella Imperia_
of our day."

"With her rough skin!" exclaimed Malaga; "so rough, that she ruins
herself in bran baths!"

"Croizeau spoke with a coach-builder's admiration of the sumptuous
furniture provided by the amorous Denisart as a setting for his fair
one, describing it all in detail with diabolical complacency for
Antonia's benefit," continued Desroches. "The ebony chests inlaid
with mother-of-pearl and gold wire, the Brussels carpets, a mediaeval
bedstead worth three thousand francs, a Boule clock, candelabra in
the four corners of the dining-room, silk curtains, on which Chinese
patience had wrought pictures of birds, and hangings over the doors,
worth more than the portress that opened them.

"'And that is what _you_ ought to have, my pretty lady.--And that is
what I should like to offer you,' he would conclude. 'I am quite aware
that you scarcely care a bit about me; but, at my age, we cannot expect
too much. Judge how much I love you; I have lent you a thousand francs.
I must confess that, in all my born days, I have not lent anybody _that_
much----'

"He held out his penny as he spoke, with the important air of a man that
gives a learned demonstration.

"That evening at the Varietes, Antonia spoke to the Count.

"'A reading-room is very dull, all the same,' said she; 'I feel that I
have no sort of taste for that kind of life, and I see no future in it.
It is only fit for a widow that wishes to keep body and soul together,
or for some hideously ugly thing that fancies she can catch a husband
with a little finery.'

"'It was your own choice,' returned the Count. Just at that moment, in
came Nucingen, of whom Maxime, king of lions (the 'yellow kid gloves'
were the lions of that day) had won three thousand francs the evening
before. Nucingen had come to pay his gaming debt.

"'Ein writ of attachment haf shoost peen served on me by der order of
dot teufel Glabaron,' he said, seeing Maxime's astonishment.

"'Oh, so that is how they are going to work, is it?' cried Maxime. 'They
are not up to much, that pair--'

"'It makes not,' said the banker, 'bay dem, for dey may apply demselfs
to oders pesides, und do you harm. I dake dees bretty voman to vitness
dot I haf baid you dees morning, long pefore dat writ vas serfed.'"

"Queen of the boards," smiled La Palferine, looking at Malaga, "thou art
about to lose thy bet."

"Once, a long time ago, in a similar case," resumed Desroches, "a too
honest debtor took fright at the idea of a solemn declaration in a court
of law, and declined to pay Maxime after notice was given. That time we
made it hot for the creditor by piling on writs of attachment, so as to
absorb the whole amount in costs--"

"Oh, what is that?" cried Malaga; "it all sounds like gibberish to me.
As you thought the sturgeon so excellent at dinner, let me take out the
value of the sauce in lessons in chicanery."

"Very well," said Desroches. "Suppose that a man owes you money, and
your creditors serve a writ of attachment upon him; there is nothing to
prevent all your other creditors from doing the same thing. And now what
does the court do when all the creditors make application for orders to
pay? _The court divides the whole sum attached, proportionately among
them all._ That division, made under the eye of a magistrate, is what
we call a _contribution_. If you owe ten thousand francs, and your
creditors issue writs of attachment on a debt due to you of a thousand
francs, each one of them gets so much per cent, 'so much in the pound,'
in legal phrase; so much (that means) in proportion to the amounts
severally claimed by the creditors. But--the creditors cannot touch the
money without a special order from the clerk of the court. Do you guess
what all this work drawn up by a judge and prepared by attorneys must
mean? It means a quantity of stamped paper full of diffuse lines and
blanks, the figures almost lost in vast spaces of completely empty ruled
columns. The first proceeding is to deduct the costs. Now, as the costs
are precisely the same whether the amount attached is one thousand or
one million francs, it is not difficult to eat up three thousand francs
(for instance) in costs, especially if you can manage to raise counter
applications."

"And an attorney always manages to do it," said Cardot. "How many a
time one of you has come to me with, 'What is there to be got out of the
case?'"

"It is particularly easy to manage it if the debtor eggs you on to
run up costs till they eat up the amount. And, as a rule, the Count's
creditors took nothing by that move, and were out of pocket in law and
personal expenses. To get money out of so experienced a debtor as the
Count, a creditor should really be in a position uncommonly difficult to
reach; it is a question of being creditor and debtor both, for then you
are legally entitled to work the confusion of rights, in law language--"

"To the confusion of the debtor?" asked Malaga, lending an attentive ear
to this discourse.

"No, the confusion of rights of debtor and creditor, and pay yourself
through your own hands. So Claparon's innocence in merely issuing writs
of attachment eased the Count's mind. As he came back from the Varietes
with Antonia, he was so much the more taken with the idea of selling
the reading-room to pay off the last two thousand francs of the
purchase-money, because he did not care to have his name made public
as a partner in such a concern. So he adopted Antonia's plan. Antonia
wished to reach the higher ranks of her calling, with splendid rooms,
a maid, and a carriage; in short, she wanted to rival our charming
hostess, for instance--"

"She was not woman enough for that," cried the famous beauty of the
Circus; "still, she ruined young d'Esgrignon very neatly."

"Ten days afterwards, little Croizeau, perched on his dignity, said
almost exactly the same thing, for the fair Antonia's benefit,"
continued Desroches.

"'Child,' said he, 'your reading-room is a hole of a place. You will
lose your complexion; the gas will ruin your eyesight. You ought to come
out of it; and, look here, let us take advantage of an opportunity. I
have found a young lady for you that asks no better than to buy your
reading-room. She is a ruined woman with nothing before her but a plunge
into the river; but she had four thousand francs in cash, and the best
thing to do is to turn them to account, so as to feed and educate a
couple of children.'

"'Very well. It is kind of you, Daddy Croizeau,' said Antonia.

"'Oh, I shall be much kinder before I have done. Just imagine it, poor
M. Denisart has been worried into the jaundice! Yes, it has gone to
the liver, as it usually does with susceptible old men. It is a pity he
feels things so. I told him so myself; I said, "Be passionate, there
is no harm in that, but as for taking things to heart--draw the line
at that! It is the way to kill yourself."--Really, I would not have
expected him to take on so about it; a man that has sense enough and
experience enough to keep away as he does while he digests his dinner--'

"'But what is the matter?' inquired Mlle. Chocardelle.

"'That little baggage with whom I dined has cleared out and left him!
... Yes. Gave him the slip without any warning but a letter, in which
the spelling was all to seek.'

"'There, Daddy Croizeau, you see what comes of boring a woman--'

"'It is indeed a lesson, my pretty lady,' said the guileful Croizeau.
'Meanwhile, I have never seen a man in such a state. Our friend Denisart
cannot tell his left hand from his right; he will not go back to look at
the "scene of his happiness," as he calls it. He has so thoroughly lost
his wits, that he proposes that I should buy all Hortense's furniture
(Hortense was her name) for four thousand francs.'

"'A pretty name,' said Antonia.

"'Yes. Napoleon's stepdaughter was called Hortense. I built carriages
for her, as you know.'

"'Very well, I will see,' said cunning Antonia; 'begin by sending this
young woman to me.'

"Antonia hurried off to see the furniture, and came back fascinated.
She brought Maxime under the spell of antiquarian enthusiasm. That
very evening the Count agreed to the sale of the reading-room. The
establishment, you see, nominally belonged to Mlle. Chocardelle. Maxime
burst out laughing at the idea of little Croizeau's finding him a buyer.
The firm of Maxime and Chocardelle was losing two thousand francs, it is
true, but what was the loss compared with four glorious thousand-franc
notes in hand? 'Four thousand francs of live coin!--there are moments in
one's life when one would sign bills for eight thousand to get them,' as
the Count said to me.

"Two days later the Count must see the furniture himself, and took the
four thousand francs upon him. The sale had been arranged; thanks to
little Croizeau's diligence, he pushed matters on; he had 'come round'
the widow, as he expressed it. It was Maxime's intention to have all
the furniture removed at once to a lodging in a new house in the Rue
Tronchet, taken in the name of Mme. Ida Bonamy; he did not trouble
himself much about the nice old man that was about to lose his thousand
francs. But he had sent beforehand for several big furniture vans.


