"But I have never felt fit for work of this kind. I prefer thought
  to action, an idea to a transaction, contemplation to activity. I
  am absolutely devoid of the constant attention indispensable to
  the making of a fortune. Any mercantile venture, any need for
  using other people's money would bring me to grief, and I should
  be ruined. Though I have nothing, at least at the moment, I owe
  nothing. The man who gives his life to the achievement of great
  things in the sphere of intellect, needs very little; still,
  though twenty sous a day would be enough, I do not possess that
  small income for my laborious idleness. When I wish to cogitate,
  want drives me out of the sanctuary where my mind has its being.
  What is to become of me?

  "I am not frightened at poverty. If it were not that beggars are
  imprisoned, branded, scorned, I would beg, to enable me to solve
  at my leisure the problems that haunt me. Still, this sublime
  resignation, by which I might emancipate my mind, through
  abstracting it from the body, would not serve my end. I should
  still need money to devote myself to certain experiments. But for
  that, I would accept the outward indigence of a sage possessed of
  both heaven and heart. A man need only never stoop, to remain
  lofty in poverty. He who struggles and endures, while marching on
  to a glorious end, presents a noble spectacle; but who can have
  the strength to fight here? We can climb cliffs, but it is
  unendurable to remain for ever tramping the mud. Everything here
  checks the flight of the spirit that strives towards the future.

  "I should not be afraid of myself in a desert cave; I am afraid of
  myself here. In the desert I should be alone with myself,
  undisturbed; here man has a thousand wants which drag him down.
  You go out walking, absorbed in dreams; the voice of the beggar
  asking an alms brings you back to this world of hunger and thirst.
  You need money only to take a walk. Your organs of sense,
  perpetually wearied by trifles, never get any rest. The poet's
  sensitive nerves are perpetually shocked, and what ought to be his
  glory becomes his torment; his imagination is his cruelest enemy.
  The injured workman, the poor mother in childbed, the prostitute
  who has fallen ill, the foundling, the infirm and aged--even vice
  and crime here find a refuge and charity; but the world is
  merciless to the inventor, to the man who thinks. Here everything
  must show an immediate and practical result. Fruitless attempts
  are mocked at, though they may lead to the greatest discoveries;
  the deep and untiring study that demands long concentrations of
  every faculty is not valued here. The State might pay talent as it
  pays the bayonet; but it is afraid of being taken in by mere
  cleverness, as if genius could be counterfeited for any length of
  time.

  "Ah, my dear uncle, when monastic solitude was destroyed, uprooted
  from its home at the foot of mountains, under green and silent
  shade, asylums ought to have been provided for those suffering
  souls who, by an idea, promote the progress of nations or prepare
  some new and fruitful development of science.

"September 20th.

  "The love of study brought me hither, as you know. I have met
  really learned men, amazing for the most part; but the lack of
  unity in scientific work almost nullifies their efforts. There is
  no Head of instruction or of scientific research. At the Museum a
  professor argues to prove that another in the Rue Saint-Jacques
  talks nonsense. The lecturer at the College of Medicine abuses him
  of the College de France. When I first arrived, I went to hear an
  old Academician who taught five hundred youths that Corneille was
  a haughty and powerful genius; Racine, elegiac and graceful;
  Moliere, inimitable; Voltaire, supremely witty; Bossuet and
  Pascal, incomparable in argument. A professor of philosophy may
  make a name by explaining how Plato is Platonic. Another
  discourses on the history of words, without troubling himself
  about ideas. One explains Aeschylus, another tells you that
  communes were communes, and neither more nor less. These original
  and brilliant discoveries, diluted to last several hours,
  constitute the higher education which is to lead to giant strides
  in human knowledge.

  "If the Government could have an idea, I should suspect it of
  being afraid of any real superiority, which, once roused, might
  bring Society under the yoke of an intelligent rule. Then nations
  would go too far and too fast; so professors are appointed to
  produce simpletons. How else can we account for a scheme devoid of
  method or any notion of the future?

  "The _Institut_ might be the central government of the moral and
  intellectual world; but it has been ruined lately by its
  subdivision into separate academies. So human science marches on,
  without a guide, without a system, and floats haphazard with no
  road traced out.

  "This vagueness and uncertainty prevails in politics as well as in
  science. In the order of nature means are simple, the end is grand
  and marvelous; here in science as in government, the means are
  stupendous, the end is mean. The force which in nature proceeds at
  an equal pace, and of which the sum is constantly being added to
  itself--the A + A from which everything is produced--is
  destructive in society. Politics, at the present time, place human
  forces in antagonism to neutralize each other, instead of
  combining them to promote their action to some definite end.

  "Looking at Europe alone, from Caesar to Constantine, from the
  puny Constantine to the great Attila, from the Huns to
  Charlemagne, from Charlemagne to Leo X., from Leo X., to Philip
  II., from Philip II. to Louis XIV.; from Venice to England, from
  England to Napoleon, from Napoleon to England, I see no fixed
  purpose in politics; its constant agitation has led to no
  progress.
