"My friend, madame, is named Gabriel Jean Anne Victor Benjamin
George Ferdinand Charles Edward Rusticoli, Comte de la Palferine. The
Rusticolis came to France with Catherine de Medici, having been ousted
about that time from their infinitesimal Tuscan sovereignty. They are
distantly related to the house of Este, and connected by marriage to
the Guises. On the day of Saint-Bartholomew they slew a goodly number
of Protestants, and Charles IX. bestowed the hand of the heiress of
the Comte de la Palferine upon the Rusticoli of that time. The Comte,
however, being a part of the confiscated lands of the Duke of Savoy,
was repurchased by Henri IV. when that great king so far blundered as
to restore the fief; and in exchange, the Rusticoli--who had borne arms
long before the Medici bore them to-wit, _argent_ a cross flory _azure_
(the cross flower-de-luced by letters patent granted by Charles IX.),
and a count's coronet, with two peasants for supporters with the motto
IN HOC SIGNO VINCIMUS--the Rusticoli, I repeat, retained their title,
and received a couple of offices under the crown with the government of
a province.

"From the time of the Valois till the reign of Richelieu, as it may be
called, the Rusticoli played a most illustrious part; under Louis XIV.
their glory waned somewhat, under Louis XV. it went out altogether.
My friend's grandfather wasted all that was left to the once brilliant
house with Mlle. Laguerre, whom he first discovered, and brought into
fashion before Bouret's time. Charles Edward's own father was an officer
without any fortune in 1789. The Revolution came to his assistance; he
had the sense to drop his title, and became plain Rusticoli. Among other
deeds, M. Rusticoli married a wife during the war in Italy, a Capponi,
a goddaughter of the Countess of Albany (hence La Palferine's final
names). Rusticoli was one of the best colonels in the army. The Emperor
made him a commander of the Legion of Honor and a count. His spine was
slightly curved, and his son was wont to say of him laughingly that he
was _un comte refait (contrefait)_.

"General Count Rusticoli, for he became a brigadier-general at Ratisbon
and a general of the division on the field of Wagram, died at Vienna
almost immediately after his promotion, or his name and ability
would sooner or later have brought him the marshal's baton. Under the
Restoration he would certainly have repaired the fortunes of a great
and noble family so brilliant even as far back as 1100, centuries before
they took the French title--for the Rusticoli had given a pope to the
church and twice revolutionized the kingdom of Naples--so illustrious
again under the Valois; so dexterous in the days of the Fronde, that
obstinate Frondeurs though they were, they still existed through the
reign of Louis XIV. Mazarin favored them; there was the Tuscan strain in
them still, and he recognized it.

"Today, when Charles Edward de la Palferine's name is mentioned, not
three persons in a hundred know the history of his house. But the
Bourbons have actually left a Foix-Grailly to live by his easel.

"Ah, if you but knew how brilliantly Charles Edward accepts his obscure
position! how he scoffs at the bourgeois of 1830! What Attic salt in his
wit! He would be the king of Bohemia, if Bohemia would endure a king.
His _verve_ is inexhaustible. To him we owe a map of the country and the
names of the seven castles which Nodier could not discover."

"The one thing wanting in one of the cleverest skits of our time," said
the Marquise.

"You can form your own opinion of La Palferine from a few characteristic
touches," continued Nathan. "He once came upon a friend of his, a
fellow-Bohemian, involved in a dispute on the boulevard with a bourgeois
who chose to consider himself affronted. To the modern powers that
be, Bohemia is insolent in the extreme. There was talk of calling one
another out.

"'One moment,' interposed La Palferine, as much Lauzun for the occasion
as Lauzun himself could have been. 'One moment. Monsieur was born, I
suppose?'

"'What, sir?'

"'Yes, are you born? What is your name?'

"'Godin.'

"'Godin, eh!' exclaimed La Palferine's friend.

"'One moment, my dear fellow,' interrupted La Palferine. 'There are the
Trigaudins. Are you one of them?'

"Astonishment.

"'No? Then you are one of the new dukes of Gaeta, I suppose, of imperial
creation? No? Oh, well, how can you expect my friend to cross swords
with you when he will be secretary of an embassy and ambassador _some
day_, and you will owe him respect? _Godin!_ the thing is non-existent!
You are a nonentity, Godin. My friend cannot be expected to beat the
air! When one is somebody, one cannot fight with a nobody! Come, my dear
fellow--good-day.'

"'My respects to madame,' added the friend.

"Another day La Palferine was walking with a friend who flung his cigar
end in the face of a passer-by. The recipient had the bad taste to
resent this.

"'You have stood your antagonist's fire,' said the young Count, 'the
witnesses declare that honor is satisfied.'

"La Palferine owed his tailor a thousand francs, and the man instead
of going himself sent his assistant to ask for the money. The assistant
found the unfortunate debtor up six pairs of stairs at the back of
a yard at the further end of the Faubourg du Roule. The room was
unfurnished save for a bed (such a bed!), a table, and such a table!
La Palferine heard the preposterous demand--'A demand which I should
qualify as illegal,' he said when he told us the story, 'made, as it
was, at seven o'clock in the morning.'

"'Go,' he answered, with the gesture and attitude of a Mirabeau, 'tell
your master in what condition you find me.'

"The assistant apologized and withdrew. La Palferine, seeing the
young man on the landing, rose in the attire celebrated in verse in
_Britannicus_ to add, 'Remark the stairs! Pay particular attention to
the stairs; do not forget to tell him about the stairs!'

"In every position into which chance has thrown La Palferine, he has
never failed to rise to the occasion. All that he does is witty and
never in bad taste; always and in everything he displays the genius of
Rivarol, the polished subtlety of the old French noble. It was he who
told that delicious anecdote of a friend of Laffitte the banker. A
national fund had been started to give back to Laffitte the mansion in
which the Revolution of 1830 was brewed, and this friend appeared at the
offices of the fund with, 'Here are five francs, give me a hundred
sous change!'--A caricature was made of it.--It was once La Palferine's
misfortune, in judicial style, to make a young girl a mother. The girl,
not a very simple innocent, confessed all to her mother, a respectable
matron, who hurried forthwith to La Palferine and asked what he meant to
do.

"'Why, madame,' said he, 'I am neither a surgeon nor a midwife.'

"She collapsed, but three or four years later she returned to the
charge, still persisting in her inquiry, 'What did La Palferine mean to
do?'

"'Well, madame,' returned he, 'when the child is seven years old, an
age at which a boy ought to pass out of women's hands'--an indication
of entire agreement on the mother's part--'if the child is really
mine'--another gesture of assent--'if there is a striking likeness, if
he bids fair to be a gentleman, if I can recognize in him my turn of
mind, and more particularly the Rusticoli air; then, oh--ah!'--a new
movement from the matron--'on my word and honor, I will make him a
cornet of--sugar-plums!'


