Prosper rose slowly, making no noise. Certain of having waked no one,
he dressed himself and went into the public room. There, with that fatal
intelligence a man suddenly finds on some occasions within him, with
that power of tact and will which is never lacking to prisoners or
to criminals in whatever they undertake, he unscrewed the iron bars,
slipped them from their places without the slightest noise, placed them
against the wall, and opened the shutters, leaning heavily upon their
hinges to keep them from creaking. The moon was shedding its pale pure
light upon the scene, and he was thus enabled to faintly see into the
room where Wilhelm and Wahlenfer were sleeping. There, he told me, he
stood still for a moment. The throbbing of his heart was so strong, so
deep, so sonorous, that he was terrified; he feared he could not act
with coolness; his hands trembled; the soles of his feet seem planted
on red-hot coal; but the execution of his plan was accompanied by such
apparent good luck that he fancied he saw a species of predestination in
this favor bestowed upon him by fate. He opened the window, returned
to the bedroom, took his case of instruments, and selected the one most
suitable to accomplish the crime.

"When I stood by the bed," he said to me, "I commended myself
mechanically to God."

At the moment when he raised his arm collecting all his strength, he
heard a voice as it were within him; he thought he saw a light. He flung
the instrument on his own bed and fled into the next room, and stood
before the window. There, he conceived the utmost horror of himself.
Feeling his virtue weak, fearing still to succumb to the spell that was
upon him he sprang out upon the road and walked along the bank of the
Rhine, pacing up and down like a sentinel before the inn. Sometimes he
went as far as Andernach in his hurried tramp; often his feet led him up
the slope he had descended on his way to the inn; and sometimes he lost
sight of the inn and the window he had left open behind him. His object,
he said, was to weary himself and so find sleep.

But, as he walked beneath the cloudless skies, beholding the stars,
affected perhaps by the purer air of night and the melancholy lapping of
the water, he fell into a reverie which brought him back by degrees to
sane moral thoughts. Reason at last dispersed completely his momentary
frenzy. The teachings of his education, its religious precepts, but
above all, so he told me, the remembrance of his simple life beneath the
parental roof drove out his wicked thoughts. When he returned to the inn
after a long meditation to which he abandoned himself on the bank of the
Rhine, resting his elbow on a rock, he could, he said to me, not have
slept, but have watched untempted beside millions of gold. At the moment
when his virtue rose proudly and vigorously from the struggle, he knelt
down, with a feeling of ecstasy and happiness, and thanked God. He felt
happy, light-hearted, content, as on the day of his first communion,
when he thought himself worthy of the angels because he had passed one
day without sinning in thought, or word, or deed.

He returned to the inn and closed the window without fearing to make
a noise, and went to bed at once. His moral and physical lassitude was
certain to bring him sleep. In a very short time after laying his head
on his mattress, he fell into that first fantastic somnolence which
precedes the deepest sleep. The senses then grew numb, and life is
abolished by degrees; thoughts are incomplete, and the last quivering of
our consciousness seems like a sort of reverie. "How heavy the air is!"
he thought; "I seem to be breathing a moist vapor." He explained this
vaguely to himself by the difference which must exist between the
atmosphere of the close room and the purer air by the river. But
presently he heard a periodical noise, something like that made by drops
of water falling from a robinet into a fountain. Obeying a feeling
of panic terror he was about to rise and call the innkeeper and waken
Wahlenfer and Wilhelm, but he suddenly remembered, alas! to his great
misfortune, the tall wooden clock; he fancied the sound was that of
the pendulum, and he fell asleep with that confused and indistinct
perception.

["Do you want some water, Monsieur Taillefer?" said the master of the
house, observing that the banker was mechanically pouring from an empty
decanter.

Monsieur Hermann continued his narrative after the slight pause
occasioned by this interruption.]

The next morning Prosper Magnan was awakened by a great noise. He seemed
to hear piercing cries, and he felt that violent shuddering of the
nerves which we suffer when on awaking we continue to feel a painful
impression begun in sleep. A physiological fact then takes place
within us, a start, to use the common expression, which has never been
sufficiently observed, though it contains very curious phenomena for
science. This terrible agony, produced, possibly, by the too sudden
reunion of our two natures separated during sleep, is usually transient;
but in the poor young surgeon's case it lasted, and even increased,
causing him suddenly the most awful horror as he beheld a pool of
blood between Wahlenfer's bed and his own mattress. The head of the
unfortunate German lay on the ground; his body was still on the bed; all
its blood had flowed out by the neck.

Seeing the eyes still open but fixed, seeing the blood which had stained
his sheets and even his hands, recognizing his own surgical instrument
beside him, Prosper Magnan fainted and fell into the pool of Wahlenfer's
blood. "It was," he said to me, "the punishment of my thoughts." When
he recovered consciousness he was in the public room, seated on a
chair, surrounded by French soldiers, and in presence of a curious and
observing crowd. He gazed stupidly at a Republican officer engaged
in taking the testimony of several witnesses, and in writing down, no
doubt, the "proces-verbal." He recognized the landlord, his wife, the
two boatmen, and the servant of the Red Inn. The surgical instrument
which the murderer had used--

[Here Monsieur Taillefer coughed, drew out his handkerchief to blow
his nose, and wiped his forehead. These perfectly natural motions
were noticed by me only; the other guests sat with their eyes fixed on
Monsieur Hermann, to whom they were listening with a sort of avidity.
The purveyor leaned his elbow on the table, put his head into his right
hand and gazed fixedly at Hermann. From that moment he showed no other
sign of emotion or interest, but his face remained passive and
ghastly, as it was when I first saw him playing with the stopper of the
decanter.]

The surgical instrument which the murderer had used was on the table
with the case containing the rest of the instruments, together with
Prosper's purse and papers. The gaze of the assembled crowd turned
alternately from these convicting articles to the young man, who seemed
to be dying and whose half-extinguished eyes apparently saw nothing. A
confused murmur which was heard without proved the presence of a crowd,
drawn to the neighborhood of the inn by the news of the crime, and also
perhaps by a desire to see the murderer. The step of the sentries
placed beneath the windows of the public room and the rattle of their
accoutrements could be heard above the talk of the populace; but the inn
was closed and the courtyard was empty and silent.

Incapable of sustaining the glance of the officer who was gathering his
testimony, Prosper Magnan suddenly felt his hand pressed by a man, and
he raised his eyes to see who his protector could be in that crowd
of enemies. He recognized by his uniform the surgeon-major of the
demi-brigade then stationed at Andernach. The glance of that man was so
piercing, so stern, that the poor young fellow shuddered, and suffered
his head to fall on the back of his chair. A soldier put vinegar to his
nostrils and he recovered consciousness. Nevertheless his haggard eyes
were so devoid of life and intelligence that the surgeon said to the
officer after feeling Prosper's pulse,--

"Captain, it is impossible to question the man at this moment."

"Very well! Take him away," replied the captain, interrupting the
surgeon, and addressing a corporal who stood behind the prisoner. "You
cursed coward!" he went on, speaking to Prosper in a low voice, "try at
least to walk firmly before these German curs, and save the honor of the
Republic."

This address seemed to wake up Prosper Magnan, who rose and made a few
steps forward; but when the door was opened and he felt the fresh air
and saw the crowd before him, he staggered and his knees gave way under
him.

"This coward of a sawbones deserves a dozen deaths! Get on!" cried the
two soldiers who had him in charge, lending him their arms to support
him.

"There he is!--oh, the villain! the coward! Here he is! There he is!"

These cries seemed to be uttered by a single voice, the tumultuous voice
of the crowd which followed him with insults and swelled at every step.
During the passage from the inn to the prison, the noise made by the
tramping of the crowd and the soldiers, the murmur of the various
colloquies, the sight of the sky, the coolness of the air, the aspect
of Andernach and the shimmering of the waters of the Rhine,--these
impressions came to the soul of the young man vaguely, confusedly,
torpidly, like all the sensations he had felt since his waking. There
were moments, he said, when he thought he was no longer living.

I was then in prison. Enthusiastic, as we all are at twenty years of
age, I wished to defend my country, and I commanded a company of free
lances, which I had organized in the vicinity of Andernach. A few days
before these events I had fallen plump, during the night, into a French
detachment of eight hundred men. We were two hundred at the most. My
scouts had sold me. I was thrown into the prison of Andernach, and they
talked of shooting me, as a warning to intimidate others. The French
talked also of reprisals. My father, however, obtained a reprieve for
three days to give him time to see General Augereau, whom he knew,
and ask for my pardon, which was granted. Thus it happened that I saw
Prosper Magnan when he was brought to the prison. He inspired me with
the profoundest pity. Though pale, distracted, and covered with blood,
his whole countenance had a character of truth and innocence which
struck me forcibly. To me his long fair hair and clear blue eyes seemed
German. A true image of my hapless country. I felt he was a victim
and not a murderer. At the moment when he passed beneath my window he
chanced to cast about him the painful, melancholy smile of an insane man
who suddenly recovers for a time a fleeting gleam of reason. That smile
was assuredly not the smile of a murderer. When I saw the jailer I
questioned him about his new prisoner.

"He has not spoken since I put him in his cell," answered the man. "He
is sitting down with his head in his hands and is either sleeping or
reflecting about his crime. The French say he'll get his reckoning
to-morrow morning and be shot in twenty-four hours."

That evening I stopped short under the window of the prison during the
short time I was allowed to take exercise in the prison yard. We talked
together, and he frankly related to me his strange affair, replying
with evident truthfulness to my various questions. After that first
conversation I no longer doubted his innocence; I asked, and obtained
the favor of staying several hours with him. I saw him again at
intervals, and the poor lad let me in without concealment to all his
thoughts. He believed himself both innocent and guilty. Remembering the
horrible temptation which he had had the strength to resist, he feared
he might have done in sleep, in a fit of somnambulism, the crime he had
dreamed of awake.


