Every day, before our eyes, a moral phenomenon of amazing profundity
takes place which is, nevertheless, so simple as never to be noticed.
If two men meet in a salon, one of whom has the right to hate or despise
the other, whether from a knowledge of some private and latent fact
which degrades him, or of a secret condition, or even of a coming
revenge, those two men divine each other's souls, and are able to
measure the gulf which separates or ought to separate them. They observe
each other unconsciously; their minds are preoccupied by themselves;
through their looks, their gestures, an indefinable emanation of their
thought transpires; there's a magnet between them. I don't know which
has the strongest power of attraction, vengeance or crime, hatred or
insult. Like a priest who cannot consecrate the host in presence of an
evil spirit, each is ill at ease and distrustful; one is polite, the
other surly, but I know not which; one colors or turns pale, the other
trembles. Often the avenger is as cowardly as the victim. Few men have
the courage to invoke an evil, even when just or necessary, and men are
silent or forgive a wrong from hatred of uproar or fear of some tragic
ending.

This introsusception of our souls and our sentiments created a
mysterious struggle between Taillefer and myself. Since the first
inquiry I had put to him during Monsieur Hermann's narrative, he had
steadily avoided my eye. Possibly he avoided those of all the other
guests. He talked with the youthful, inexperienced daughter of the
banker, feeling, no doubt, like many other criminals, a need of drawing
near to innocence, hoping to find rest there. But, though I was a long
distance from him, I heard him, and my piercing eye fascinated his. When
he thought he could watch me unobserved our eyes met, and his eyelids
dropped immediately.

Weary of this torture, Taillefer seemed determined to put an end to it
by sitting down at a card-table. I at once went to bet on his adversary;
hoping to lose my money. The wish was granted; the player left the table
and I took his place, face to face with the murderer.

"Monsieur," I said, while he dealt the cards, "may I ask if you are
Monsieur Frederic Taillefer, whose family I know very well at Beauvais?"

"Yes, monsieur," he answered.

He dropped the cards, turned pale, put his hands to his head and rose,
asking one of the bettors to take his hand.

"It is too hot here," he cried; "I fear--"

He did not end the sentence. His face expressed intolerable suffering,
and he went out hastily. The master of the house followed him and seemed
to take an anxious interest in his condition. My neighbor and I looked
at each other, but I saw a tinge of bitter sadness or reproach upon her
countenance.

"Do you think your conduct is merciful?" she asked, drawing me to the
embrasure of a window just as I was leaving the card-table, having lost
all my money. "Would you accept the power of reading hearts? Why not
leave things to human justice or divine justice? We may escape one but
we cannot escape the other. Do you think the privilege of a judge of the
court of assizes so much to be envied? You have almost done the work of
an executioner."

"After sharing and stimulating my curiosity, why are you now lecturing
me on morality?"

"You have made me reflect," she answered.

"So, then, peace to villains, war to the sorrowful, and let's deify
gold! However, we will drop the subject," I added, laughing. "Do you see
that young girl who is just entering the salon?"

"Yes, what of her?"

"I met her, three days ago, at the ball of the Neapolitan ambassador,
and I am passionately in love with her. For pity's sake tell me her
name. No one was able--"

"That is Mademoiselle Victorine Taillefer."

I grew dizzy.

"Her step-mother," continued my neighbor, "has lately taken her from a
convent, where she was finishing, rather late in the day, her education.
For a long time her father refused to recognize her. She comes here for
the first time. She is very beautiful and very rich."

These words were accompanied by a sardonic smile.

At this moment we heard violent, but smothered outcries; they seemed to
come from a neighboring apartment and to be echoed faintly back through
the garden.

"Isn't that the voice of Monsieur Taillefer?" I said.

We gave our full attention to the noise; a frightful moaning reached our
ears. The wife of the banker came hurriedly towards us and closed the
window.

"Let us avoid a scene," she said. "If Mademoiselle Taillefer hears her
father, she might be thrown into hysterics."

The banker now re-entered the salon, looked round for Victorine, and
said a few words in her ear. Instantly the young girl uttered a cry, ran
to the door, and disappeared. This event produced a great sensation. The
card-players paused. Every one questioned his neighbor. The murmur of
voices swelled, and groups gathered.

"Can Monsieur Taillefer be--" I began.

"--dead?" said my sarcastic neighbor. "You would wear the gayest
mourning, I fancy!"

"But what has happened to him?"

"The poor dear man," said the mistress of the house, "is subject to
attacks of a disease the name of which I never can remember, though
Monsieur Brousson has often told it to me; and he has just been seized
with one."

"What is the nature of the disease?" asked an examining-judge.

"Oh, it is something terrible, monsieur," she replied. "The doctors know
no remedy. It causes the most dreadful suffering. One day, while the
unfortunate man was staying at my country-house, he had an attack, and
I was obliged to go away and stay with a neighbor to avoid hearing him;
his cries were terrible; he tried to kill himself; his daughter was
obliged to have him put into a strait-jacket and fastened to his bed.
The poor man declares there are live animals in his head gnawing his
brain; every nerve quivers with horrible shooting pains, and he writhes
in torture. He suffers so much in his head that he did not even feel the
moxas they used formerly to apply to relieve it; but Monsieur Brousson,
who is now his physician, has forbidden that remedy, declaring that the
trouble is a nervous affection, an inflammation of the nerves, for
which leeches should be applied to the neck, and opium to the head. As a
result, the attacks are not so frequent; they appear now only about once
a year, and always late in the autumn. When he recovers, Taillefer says
repeatedly that he would far rather die than endure such torture."

"Then he must suffer terribly!" said a broker, considered a wit, who was
present.

"Oh," continued the mistress of the house, "last year he nearly died in
one of these attacks. He had gone alone to his country-house on pressing
business. For want, perhaps, of immediate help, he lay twenty-two hours
stiff and stark as though he were dead. A very hot bath was all that
saved him."

"It must be a species of lockjaw," said one of the guests.

"I don't know," she answered. "He got the disease in the army nearly
thirty years ago. He says it was caused by a splinter of wood entering
his head from a shot on board a boat. Brousson hopes to cure him. They
say the English have discovered a mode of treating the disease with
prussic acid--"

At that instant a still more piercing cry echoed through the house, and
froze us with horror.

"There! that is what I listened to all day long last year," said
the banker's wife. "It made me jump in my chair and rasped my nerves
dreadfully. But, strange to say, poor Taillefer, though he suffers
untold agony, is in no danger of dying. He eats and drinks as well as
ever during even short cessations of the pain--nature is so queer!
A German doctor told him it was a form of gout in the head, and that
agrees with Brousson's opinion."


