Finally there were assembled in the court as many as fourteen persons of
various costumes and different professions. Among the latest arrivals
were two dashing and elegant youths with long moustachios, hats of
immense brims, broad collars, stiffly starched, coloured stockings,
garters with great bows and fringed ends, swords of a length beyond that
permitted by law, and each having a pistol in his belt, with a buckler
hanging on his arm. No sooner had these men entered, than they began to
look askance at Rincon and Cortado, whom they were evidently surprised
to see there, as persons unknown to themselves. At length the new-comers
accosted the two friends, asking if they were of the brotherhood. "We
are so," replied Rincon, "and the very humble servants of your worships
besides."

At this moment the Señor Monipodio honoured the respectable assembly
with his welcome presence. He appeared to be about five or six-and-forty
years old, tall, and of dark complexion; his eyebrows met on his
forehead, his black beard was very thick, and his eyes were deeply sunk
in his head. He had come down in his shirt, through the opening of which
was seen a hairy bosom, as rough and thick set as a forest of brushwood.
Over his shoulders was thrown a serge cloak, reaching nearly to his
feet, which were cased in old shoes, cut down to make slippers; his legs
were covered with a kind of linen gaiters, wide and ample, which fell
low upon his ankles. His hat was that worn by those of the Hampa,
bell-formed in the crown, and very wide in the brim.[21] Across his
breast was a leather baldric, supporting a broad, short sword of the
_perrillo_ fashion.[22] His hands were short and coarse, the fingers
thick, and the nails much flattened: his legs were concealed by the
gaiters, but his feet were of immoderate size, and the most clumsy form.
In short, he was the coarsest and most repulsive barbarian ever beheld.
With him came the conductor of the two friends; who, taking Rincon and
Cortado each by a hand, presented them to Monipodio, saying, "These are
the two good boys of whom I spoke to your worship, Señor Monipodio. May
it please your worship to examine them, and you will see how well they
are prepared to enter our brotherhood." "That I will do willingly,"
replied Monipodio.

But I had forgotten to say, that when Monipodio had first appeared, all
those who were waiting for him, made a deep and long reverence, the two
dashing cavaliers alone excepted, who did but just touch their hats, and
then continued their walk up and down the court.

Monipodio also began to pace up and down the patio, and, as he did so,
he questioned the new disciples as to their trade, their birthplace, and
their parents. To this Rincon replied, "Our trade is sufficiently
obvious, since we are here before your worship; as to our country, it
does not appear to me essential to the matter in hand that we should
declare it, any more than the names of our parents, since we are not now
stating our qualifications for admission into some noble order of
knighthood."

"What you say, my son, is true, as well as discreet," replied Monipodio;
"and it is, without doubt, highly prudent to conceal those
circumstances; for if things should turn out badly, there is no need to
have placed upon the books of register, and under the sign manual of the
justice-clerk, 'So and so, native of such a place, was hanged, or made
to dance at the whipping-post, on such a day,' with other announcements
of the like kind, which, to say the least of them, do not sound
agreeable in respectable ears. Thus, I repeat, that to conceal the name
and abode of your parents, and even to change your own proper
appellation, are prudent measures. Between ourselves there must,
nevertheless, be no concealment: for the present I will ask your names
only, but these you must give me."

Rincon then told his name, and so did Cortado: whereupon Monipodio said,
"Henceforward I request and desire that you, Rincon, call yourself
Rinconete, and you, Cortado, Cortadillo; these being names which accord,
as though made in a mould, with your age and circumstances, as well as
with our ordinances, which make it needful that we should also know the
names of the parents of our comrades, because it is our custom to have a
certain number of masses said every year for the souls of our dead, and
of the benefactors of our society; and we provide for the payment of the
priests who say them, by setting apart a share of our swag for that
purpose.

"These masses, thus said and paid for, are of great service to the souls
aforesaid. Among our benefactors we count the Alguazil, who gives us
warning; the Advocate, who defends us; the Executioner, who takes pity
upon us when we have to be whipped, and the man who, when we are running
along the street, and the people in full cry after us bawling 'Stop
thief,' throws himself between us and our pursuers, and checks the
torrent, saying, 'Let the poor wretch alone, his lot is hard enough; let
him go, and his crime will be his punishment.' We also count among our
benefactors the good wenches who aid us by their labours while we are in
prison, or at the galleys; our fathers, and the mothers who brought us
into the world; and, finally, we take care to include the Clerk of the
Court, for if he befriend us, there is no crime which he will not find
means to reduce to a slight fault, and no fault which he does not
prevent from being punished. For all these our brotherhood causes the
_sanctimonies_ (ceremonies) I have named to be _solecised_ (solemnised)
every year, with all possible _grandiloquence_.


