Here she came to an end, leaving me almost desperate; and without doubt
I should have become wholly so, if my guardian angel had failed in the
least to support me, and whisper to my heart that I ought to consider I
was a Christian, and that the greatest sin men can be guilty of is
despair, since it is the sin of devils. This consideration, or good
inspiration, comforted me a little; not so much, however, but that I
took my cloak and sword, and went out in search of Doña Estefania,
resolved to inflict upon her an exemplary chastisement; but chance
ordained, whether for my good or not I cannot tell, that she was not to
be found in any of the places where I expected to fall in with her. I
went to the church of San Lorente, commended me to our Lady, sat down on
a bench, and in my affliction fell into so deep a sleep that I should
not have awoke for a long time if others had not roused me. I went with
a heavy heart to Doña Clementa's, and found her as much at ease as a
lady should be in her own house. Not daring to say a word to her,
because Señor Don Lope was present, I returned to my landlady, who told
me she had informed Doña Estefania that I was acquainted with her whole
roguery; that she had asked how I had seemed to take the news; that
she, the landlady, said I had taken it very badly, and had gone out to
look for her, apparently with the worst intentions; whereupon Doña
Estefania had gone away, taking with her all that was in my trunk, only
leaving me one travelling coat. I flew to my trunk, and found it open,
like a coffin waiting for a dead body; and well might it have been my
own, if sense enough had been left me to comprehend the magnitude of my
misfortune.

"Great it was, indeed," observed the licentiate Peralta; "only to think
that Doña Estefania carried off your fine chain and hat-band! Well, it
is a true saying, 'Misfortunes never come single.'"

I do not so much mind that loss, replied the Alferez, since I may apply
to myself the old saw, "My father-in-law thought to cheat me by putting
off his squinting daughter upon me; and I myself am blind of an eye."

"I don't know in what respect you can say that?" replied Peralta.

Why, in this respect, that all that lot of chains and gewgaws might be
worth some ten or twelve crowns.

"Impossible!" exclaimed the licentiate; "for that which the Señor
Alferez wore on his neck must have weighed more than two hundred
ducats."

So it would have done, replied the Alferez, if the reality had
corresponded with the appearance; but "All is not gold that glitters,"
and my fine things were only imitations, but so well made that nothing
but the touchstone or the fire could have detected that they were not
genuine.

"So, then, it seems to have been a drawn game between you and the Señora
Doña Estefania," said the licentiate.

So much so that we may shuffle the cards and make a fresh deal. Only the
mischief is, Señor Licentiate, that she may get rid of my mock chains,
but I cannot get rid of the cheat she put upon me; for, in spite of my
teeth, she remains my wife.

"You may thank God, Señor Campuzano," said Peralta, "that your wife has
taken to her heels, and that you are not obliged to go in search of
her."

Very true; but for all that, even without looking for her, I always find
her--in imagination; and wherever I am, my disgrace is always present
before me.

"I know not what answer to make you, except to remind you of these two
verses of Petrarch:--

    "'Che qui prende diletto di far frode,
    Non s'ha di lamentar s'altro l'inganna.'

That is to say, whoever makes it his practice and his pleasure to
deceive others, has no right to complain when he is himself deceived."


