The second proof of jealousy given by Felipe was, that he would not
consummate his marriage until he had provided a house after his own
fancy, which he arranged in this singular manner. He bought one for
twelve thousand ducats, in one of the best wards of the city, with a
fountain and pond, and a garden well stocked with orange trees. He put
screens before all the windows that looked towards the street, leaving
them no other prospect than the sky, and did much the same with all the
others in the house. In the gateway next the street, he erected a stable
for a mule, and over it a straw loft, and a room for an old black
eunuch, who was to take care of the mule. He raised the parapets round
the flat roof of the house so high, that nothing could be seen above
them but the sky, and that only by turning one's face upwards. In the
inner door, opening from the gateway upon the quadrangle, he fixed a
turning box like that of a convent, by means of which articles were to
be received from without. He furnished the house in a sumptuous style,
such as would have become the mansion of a great lord; and he bought
four white slave girls, whom he branded in the face, and two negresses.
For the daily supplies of his establishment he engaged a purveyor, who
was to make all the necessary purchases, but was not to sleep in the
house or ever enter it further than to the second door, where he was to
deposit what he had brought in the turning box. Having made these
arrangements, Carrizales invested part of his money in sundry good
securities; part he placed in the bank, and the rest he kept by him to
meet any emergencies that might arise. He also had a master key made for
his whole house; and he laid up a whole year's store of all such things
as it is usual to purchase in bulk at their respective seasons; and
everything being now ready to his mind, he went to his father-in-law's
house and claimed his bride, whom her parents delivered up to him with
no few tears, for it seemed to them as if they were giving her up for
burial.

Leonora knew not, poor young creature, what was before her, but she shed
tears because she saw her parents weep, and taking leave of them with
their blessing, she went to her new home, her husband leading her by the
hand, and her slaves and servants attending her. On their arrival
Carrizales harangued all his domestics, enjoining them to keep careful
watch over Leonora, and by no means, on any pretence whatsoever, to
allow anybody to enter within the second gate, not even the black
eunuch. But the person whom above all others he charged with the safe
keeping and due entertainment of his wife was a dueña of much prudence
and gravity, whom he had taken to be Leonora's monitress, and
superintendent of the whole house, and to command the slaves and two
other maidens of Leonora's age whom he had also added to his family,
that his wife might not be without companions of her own years. He
promised them all that he would treat them so well, and take such care
for their comfort and gratification, that they should not feel their
confinement, and that on holidays they should every one of them without
exception be allowed to go to mass; but so early in the morning that
daylight itself should scarcely have a chance of seeing them. The
servant maids and the slaves promised to obey all his orders cheerfully
and with prompt alacrity and the bride, with a timid shrinking of her
shoulders, bowed her head, and said that she had no other will than that
of her lord and spouse, to whom she always owed obedience.

Having thus laid down the law for the government of his household, the
worthy Estramaduran began to enjoy, as well as he could, the fruits of
matrimony, which, to Leonora's inexperienced taste, were neither
sweet-flavoured nor insipid. Her days were spent with her dueña, her
damsels, and her slaves, who, to make the time pass more agreeably, took
to pampering their palates, and few days passed in which they did not
make lots of things in which they consumed a great deal of honey and
sugar. Their master gladly supplied them with all they could wish for in
that way without stint, for by that means he expected to keep them
occupied and amused, so that they should have no time to think of their
confinement and seclusion. Leonora lived on a footing of equality with
her domestics, amused herself as they did, and even in her simplicity
took pleasure in dressing dolls and other childish pastime. All this
afforded infinite satisfaction to the jealous husband; it seemed to him
that he had chosen the best way of life imaginable, and that it was not
within the compass of human art or malice to trouble his repose:
accordingly his whole care was devoted to anticipating his wife's wishes
by all sorts of presents, and encouraging her to ask for whatever came
into her head, for in everything it should be his pleasure to gratify
her.

On the days she went to mass, which as we have said was before daylight,
her parents attended at church and talked with their daughter in
presence of her husband, who made them such liberal gifts as mitigated
the keenness of their compassion for the secluded life led by their
daughter. Carrizales used to get up in the morning and watch for the
arrival of the purveyor, who was always made aware of what was wanted
for the day by means of a note placed over-night in the turning box.
After the purveyor had come and gone, Carrizales used to go abroad,
generally on foot, locking both entrance doors behind him--that next the
street, and that which opened on the quadrangle,--and leaving the negro
shut up between them. Having despatched his business, which was not
much, he speedily returned, shut himself up in his house, and occupied
himself in making much of his wife and her handmaids, who all liked him
for his placid and agreeable humour, and above all for his great
liberality towards them. In this way they passed a year of novitiate,
and made profession of that manner of life, resolved every one of them
to continue in it to the end of their days; and so it would have been,
if the crafty perturber of the human race had not brought their chaste
purposes to nought, as you shall presently hear.

Now, I ask the most long-headed and wary of my readers, what more could
old Felipe have done in the way of taking precautions for his security,
since he would not even allow that there should be any male animal
within his dwelling? No tom-cat ever persecuted its rats, nor was the
barking of a dog ever heard within its walls; all creatures belonging to
it were of the feminine gender. He took thought by day, and by night he
did not sleep; he was himself the patrol and sentinel of his house, and
the Argus of what he held dear. Never did a man set foot within the
quadrangle; he transacted his business with his friends in the street;
the pictures that adorned his rooms were all female figures, flowers, or
landscapes; his whole dwelling breathed an odour of propriety,
seclusion, and circumspection; the very tales which the maid servants
told by the fireside in the long winter nights, being told in his
presence, were perfectly free from the least tinge of wantonness. Her
aged spouse's silver hairs seemed in Leonora's eyes locks of pure gold;
for the first love known by maidens imprints itself on their hearts like
a seal on melted wax. His inordinate watchfulness seemed to her no more
than the due caution of an experienced and judicious man. She was fully
persuaded that the life she led was the same as that led by all married
women. Her thoughts never wandered beyond the walls of her dwelling, nor
had she a wish that was not the same as her husband's. It was only on
the days she went to mass that she set eyes on the streets, and that was
so early in the morning, that except on the way home she had not light
to look about her. Never was there seen a convent more closely barred
and bolted; never were nuns kept more recluse, or golden apples better
guarded; and yet for all his precautions poor Felipe could not help
falling into the pit he dreaded,--or at least believing that he had so
fallen.


