If he was liberal in promises, his slaves were prodigal; they would
bring down the moon to him from Heaven, much more Leonisa, if only he
gave them an opportunity of speaking with her. "Mario shall have one
whenever he pleases," said the cadi, "for I will make Halima go for some
days to the house of her parents, who are Greek Christians, and when she
is away I will order the porter to admit Mario into the house as often
as he pleases, and I will tell Leonisa that she may converse with her
countryman whenever she has a mind." Thus did the wind begin to shift in
Ricardo's favour, his master and mistress working for him without
knowing it; and the first who began was Halima, as was to be expected of
her, for it is the nature of women ever to be prompt and bold where
their pleasures are concerned.

That same day the cadi told Halima that she might pay a visit to her
parents, and stay with them some time if she liked; but elated as she
was with the false hopes given her by Leonisa, she was so far from
wishing to visit her parents, that she would not have cared to go to the
imaginary paradise of Mahomet. She replied then that she had no such
wish at that moment; when she had she would mention it, and then she
would take the Christian maiden with her. "That you must not," replied
the cadi, "for it is not right that the Grand Signor's slave should be
seen by any one, much less should she converse with Christians; for you
know that when she comes into the Sultan's possession she will be shut
up in the seraglio, and must become a Turk whether she will or not."

"As she will be in my company," said Halima, "there will be no harm in
her being in the house of my parents, or conversing with them. I do so
myself, and I am not less a good Turk for all that. Besides, I do not
intend to remain with them more than four or five days at most, for my
love for you will not allow me to be so long without seeing you." Here
the conversation dropped, the cadi not venturing to make any further
objection, for fear of rousing her suspicions.

Friday being come, he went to the mosque, from which he was sure not to
return for about four hours. He was no sooner gone than Halima sent for
Mario; but a Corsican slave who acted as porter, would not have admitted
him into the court-yard if Halima had not called out to let him pass,
whereupon he came in confused and trembling as if he were going to
encounter a host of enemies. Leonisa was seated at the foot of a great
marble staircase, in the dress in which she had appeared before the
pashas. Her right arm resting on her knee supported her head, and her
back was towards the door by which Mario entered, so that though he
advanced to where she sat, she did not see him.

Ricardo cast his eyes all round the place when he entered; all was
silence and solitude till he turned his gaze to where Leonisa sat.
Instantly he was seized with a thousand conflicting emotions. He was
within twenty paces of the object of his soul's desire; but he was a
captive, and the glory of his life was in the power of another. Thus
agitated with fear and exultation, joy and sadness, he advanced towards
her slowly, until Leonisa suddenly turned round and her eyes met his
earnest gaze. He stopped, unable to move another step. Leonisa, who
believed him to be dead, was struck with awe and consternation at seeing
him so unexpectedly before her. With her eyes still fixed upon him and
without turning her back, she retreated up four or five stairs, took a
little cross from her breast, kissed it again and again, and crossed
herself repeatedly, as though a being from the other world stood before
her. Ricardo presently recovered himself, and perceiving from Leonisa's
gestures what was the cause of her terror, he said, "It grieves me,
beautiful Leonisa, that the news which Mahmoud gave you of my death was
not true, so that I might be free from the fear I now feel lest the
rigour you have also shown towards me still subsists entire. Set your
mind at ease, lady, and come down; and if you will do what you have
never yet done--approach me--you will see that I am not a phantom. I am
Ricardo, Leonisa,--Ricardo the happy, if you will bid him be so."

Here Leonisa put her finger to her lips, giving Ricardo to understand
that he should be silent or speak more low. Gathering a little courage,
he drew near enough to hear her whisper thus: "Speak softly, Mario (for
so I hear you are now called): talk of nothing but what I talk of, and
bear in mind that if we are overheard it will be the cause of our never
meeting again. I believe that Halima, our mistress, is listening to us:
she has told me that she adores you, and has sent me here as her
intercessor. If you will respond to her desires, you will consult the
interest of your body more than of your soul; and if you will not, you
must feign to do so, were it only because I request it, and for sake of
what is due to the declared desires of a woman."

"Never did I think, never could I imagine, beauteous Leonisa," replied
Ricardo, "that you could ever ask anything of me with which I should
find it impossible to comply; but this present request of yours has
undeceived me. Is the inclination so slight a thing that it can be moved
this way or that at pleasure? Or would it become a man of truth and
honour to feign in matters of such weight? If you think that such things
can or ought to be done, be it as you will, since it is for you to
command and for me to obey; and that it may not be said I failed to do
so with regard to the first order you laid upon me, I will impose
silence on the voice of my honour, and will pretend to return Halima's
passion, as you desire, if I may thereby secure the blessing of seeing
you; and you have only to signify as much to her in such terms as you
shall think proper. In return for this sacrifice, to me the greatest
possible, I entreat you to tell me briefly how you escaped from the
hands of the corsairs, and fell into those of the Jew who sold you."

"The recital of my misfortunes," Leonisa answered, "demands more time
than we have now at our disposal; nevertheless, I will tell you some
particulars. The day after we parted company, Yusuf's galley was driven
back by a contrary wind to the island of Pantanalea, where we also saw
your galley, but ours, in spite of all efforts, was driven upon the
rocks. My master, seeing death so near, quickly emptied two water-casks,
closed them tightly, lashed them together with ropes, and placed me
between them. Then stripping off his clothes he took another cask in his
arms, and passing round his body a rope attached to the casks on which I
was placed, he boldly plunged into the sea. I had not the courage to
follow his example, but another Turk pushed me in. I fell senseless into
the water, and did not recover until I found myself on land, in the arms
of two Turks, who held me with my mouth downwards, discharging a great
quantity of water which I had swallowed. I opened my eyes, and looking
wildly round me, the first thing I saw was Yusuf lying beside me with
his skull shattered, having, as I afterwards learned, been dashed head
foremost against the rocks.

"The Turks told me that they had hawled me ashore by the rope, more dead
than alive. Only eight persons escaped out of the unfortunate galley. We
remained eight days on the island, during which the Turks treated me
with as much respect as if I were their sister. We lay hid in a cave,
the Turks being afraid of being captured by some of the Christian
garrison of a fort in the island, and we supported ourselves with
biscuits from the foundered galley which the waves cast ashore, and
which the men collected by night. It happened for my misfortune that the
commandant of the fort had died a few days before, and that there were
in it only twenty soldiers; this fact we learned from a boy whom the
Turks captured as he was amusing himself gathering shells on the shore.
At the end of eight days a Moorish vessel, of the kind which the Turks
call _caramuzal_, hove in sight; the Turks quitted their hiding-place,
and made signals which were recognised by the crew of the caramuzal.
They landed, and hearing from their countrymen an account of their
disasters, they took us all on board, where there was a very rich Jew,
to whom the whole cargo, or the greater part of it, belonged, consisting
of carpets, stuffs, and other wares, which are commonly exported by the
Jews from Barbary to the Levant. The vessel carried us to Tripoli, and
during the voyage I was sold to the Jew, who gave two thousand
doubloons, an excessive price; but the Jew was made liberal by the love
he conceived for me.


