In that sumptuous attire, with her sprightly air and marvellous beauty,
she made her appearance in London in a handsome coach, fascinating the
eyes and souls of all who beheld her. Clotald, his wife, and Richard
rode with her in the coach, and many noble relations of the family
escorted her on horseback, Clotald desiring that all these honours
should be paid to his prisoner, in order that the queen might treat her
as his son's betrothed. When they arrived at the palace, and entered the
vast hall in which her majesty was seated, Isabella's escort halted at
the lower end, and she herself advanced alone in all her inconceivable
beauty, producing an effect like that of a brilliant meteor shooting
through the sky on a calm clear night, or of a sunbeam darting at the
first dawn of day through a mountain gorge. A comet she seemed,
portending a fiery doom to the hearts of many in that presence hall.
Full of meekness and courtesy, she advanced to the foot of the throne,
knelt before the queen, and said to her in English, "May it please your
Majesty to extend your royal hands to your servant's lips, who will
henceforth esteem herself exalted, since she has been so fortunate as to
behold your grandeur."

The queen remained a good while gazing on her without saying a word,
figuring to herself, as she afterwards told her lady of the bed-chamber,
that she had before her a starry heaven, the stars of which were the
many pearls and diamonds worn by Isabella; her fair face and her eyes
its sun and moon, and her whole person a new marvel of beauty. The
queen's ladies would fain have been all eyes, that they might do nothing
but gaze on Isabella; one praised her brilliant eyes, one her
complexion, another her fine figure, another her sweet voice; and one
there was who said in pure envy, "The Spaniard is good looking, but I do
not like her dress."

At last the queen motioned to Isabella to rise, and said to her, "Speak
to me in Spanish, maiden, for I understand it well, and shall like to
hear it." Then turning to Clotald, "You have done me wrong, Clotald,"
she said, "in keeping this treasure so many years concealed from me; but
it is such a one as may well have excited you to avarice. You are bound
however to restore it to me, for by right it is mine."

"My liege," replied Clotald, "what your majesty says is quite true; I
confess my fault, if it is one, to have kept this treasure until it
arrived at the perfection suitable for appearing before your majesty's
eyes. Now that it has done so, I had it in mind to enhance it still
more, by asking your majesty's leave for Isabella to become the wife of
my son Richard."

"I like her name, too," returned the queen. "Nothing was wanting to the
fulness of her perfection but that she should be called Isabella the
Spaniard. But, mark you, Clotald, I know that, without my leave, you
have promised her to your son."

"That is true, my liege, but it was in the confident hope that the many
eminent services which my ancestors and I have rendered to the crown,
would obtain from your majesty favours still more difficult to grant
than the leave in question, the more so as my son is not yet wedded."

"Nor shall he be wedded to Isabella," said the queen, "until he has
merited it in his own person. I mean that I will not have him avail
himself to that end of your services or those of his forefathers. He
must himself prepare to serve me, and win by his own deserts this prize
which I esteem as if she were my daughter."

The queen had no sooner uttered these last words than Isabella again
fell on her knees before her, saying in Spanish, "Such thwartings as
these, most gracious sovereign, are rather to be esteemed auspicious
boons than misfortunes. Your majesty has given me the name of daughter;
after that what can I have to fear, or what may I not hope?"

Isabella uttered this with so winning a grace, that the queen conceived
an extreme affection for her, desired that she should remain in her
service, and committed her to the care of a great lady, her keeper of
the robes, who was to instruct her in the duties of her new position.

Richard, who saw himself thus, as it were, deprived of his life in
losing Isabella, was almost at his wits' end. Agitated and discomfited,
he knelt before the queen, and said, "I need no other rewards to induce
me to serve your majesty than such as my ancestors have obtained in the
service of your royal predecessors; but since it is your majesty's
pleasure that I should have new motives and incentives for my zeal, I
would crave to know in what way I may fulfil your majesty's behest?"

"There are two ships ready to set out on a cruise," said the queen, "of
which I have made the Baron de Lansac general. I appoint you captain of
one of them, being assured that the qualities you derive from those
whose blood is in your veins will supply the defect of your years. Mark
what a favour I confer upon you, since I give you an opportunity to
signalise yourself in the service of your queen, to display your
capacity and your valour, and to win the highest reward, methinks, which
you yourself could desire. I myself will be Isabella's guardian, though
she manifests that her own virtue will be her truest guardian. Go in
God's name; for since you are in love, as I imagine, I expect great
things from your prowess. Fortunate were the king who in time of war had
in his army ten thousand soldiers in love, expecting to obtain their
mistresses as the reward of their victories. Rise, Richard, and if you
have anything to say to Isabella, say it now, for to-morrow you must
sail."


