By this time they reached the inn, where the conversation was prolonged
in the same tone, half the night long. After they had slept, as it
seemed to them, little more than an hour, they were awakened by the loud
sound of clarions in the street. They sat up in bed, and after they had
listened awhile, "I'll lay a wager," said Carriazo, "that it is already
day, and that there is some feast or other in the convent of Nostra
Señora del Carmen, in this neighbourhood, and that is why the clarions
are pealing."

"That can't be," said Avendaño; "we have not been long asleep. It must
be some time yet till dawn."

While they were talking, some one knocked at the door, and called out,
"Young men, if you want to hear some fine music, go to the window of the
next room, which looks on the street; it is not occupied."

They got up and opened the door, but the person who had spoken was gone.
The music still continuing, however, they went in their shirts, just as
they were, into the front room, where they found three or four other
lodgers, who made place for them at the window; and soon afterwards an
excellent voice sang a sonnet to the accompaniment of the harp. There
was no need of any one to tell Carriazo and Avendaño that this music was
intended for Costanza, for this was very clear from the words of the
sonnet, which grated so horribly on Avendaño's ears, that he could have
wished himself deaf rather than have heard it. The pangs of jealousy
laid hold on him, and the worst of all was, that he knew not who was his
rival. But this was soon made known to him when one of the persons at
the window exclaimed, "What a simpleton is the corregidor's son, to make
a practice of serenading a scullery-maid. It is true, she is one of the
most beautiful girls I have ever seen, and I have seen a great many; but
that is no reason why he should court her so publicly."

"After all," said another, "I have been told for certain that she makes
no more account of him than if he never existed. I warrant she is this
moment fast asleep behind her mistress's bed, without ever thinking of
all this music."

"I can well believe it," said the first speaker, "for she is the most
virtuous girl I know; and it is marvellous that though she lives in a
house like this, where there is so much traffic, and where there are new
comers every day, and though she goes about all the rooms, not the least
thing in the world is known to her disparagement."

Avendaño began to breathe more freely after hearing this, and was able
to listen to many fine things which were sung to the accompaniment of
various instruments, all being addressed to Costanza, who, as the
stranger said, was fast asleep all the while.

The musicians departed at the approach of dawn. Avendaño and Carriazo
returned to their room, where one of them slept till morning. They then
rose, both of them eager to see Costanza, but the one only from
curiosity, the other from love. Both were gratified; for Costanza came
out of her master's room looking so lovely, that they both felt that all
the praises bestowed on her by the muleteer, fell immeasurably short of
her deserts. She was dressed in a green bodice and petticoat, trimmed
with the same colour. A collar embroidered with black silk set off the
alabaster whiteness of her neck. The thick tresses of her bright
chestnut hair were bound up with white ribbon; she had pendents in her
ears which seemed to be pearls, but were only glass; her girdle was a
St. Francis cord, and a large bunch of keys hung at her side. When she
came out of the room she crossed herself, and made a profound reverence
with great devotion to an image of our Lady, that hung on one of the
walls of the quadrangle. Then looking up and seeing the two young men
intently gazing on her, she immediately retired again into the room, and
called thence to Argüello to get up.

Carriazo, it must be owned, was much struck by Costanza's beauty; he
admired it as much as his companion, only he did not fall in love with
her; on the contrary, he had no desire to spend another night in the
inn, but to set out at once for the fisheries.

La Argüello presently appeared in the gallery with two young women,
natives of Gallicia, who were also servants in the inn; for the number
employed in the Sevillano was considerable, that being one of the best
and most frequented houses of its kind in Toledo. At the same time the
servants of the persons lodging in the inn began to assemble to receive
oats for their masters' beasts; and the host dealt them out, all the
while grumbling and swearing at his maid-servants who had been the cause
of his losing the services of a capital hostler, who did the work so
well and kept such good reckoning, that he did not think he had ever
lost the price of a grain of oats by him. Avendaño, who heard all this,
seized the opportunity at once. "Don't fatigue yourself, señor host," he
said; "give me the account-book, and whilst I remain here I will give
out the oats, and keep such an exact account of it that you will not
miss the hostler who you say has left you."

"Truly I thank you for the offer, my lad," said the host, "for I have no
time to attend to this business; I have too much to do, both indoors
and out of doors. Come down and I will give you the book; and mind ye,
these muleteers are the very devil, and will do you out of a peck of
oats under your very nose, with no more conscience than if it was so
much chaff."

Avendaño went down to the quadrangle, took the book, and began to serve
out pecks of oats like water, and to note them down with such exactness
that the landlord, who stood watching him, was greatly pleased with his
performance. "I wish to God," he said, "your master would not come, and
that you would make up your mind to stop with me; you would lose nothing
by the change, believe me. The hostler who has just quitted me came here
eight months ago all in tatters, and as lean as a shotten herring, and
now he has two very good suits of clothes, and is as fat as a dormouse;
for you must know, my son, that in this house there are excellent vails
to be got over and above the wages."


