At the vespers and feast of Santa Anna Preciosa was somewhat fatigued;
but so celebrated had she become for beauty, wit, and discretion, as
well as for her dancing, that nothing else was talked of throughout the
capital. A fortnight afterwards, she returned to Madrid, with three
other girls, provided with their tambourines and a new dance, besides a
new stock of romances and songs, but all of a moral character; for
Preciosa would never permit those in her company to sing immodest songs,
nor would she ever sing them herself. The old gitana came with her, for
she now watched her as closely as Argus, and never left her side, lest
some one should carry her off. She called her granddaughter, and the
girl believed herself to be her grandchild.

The young gitanas began their dance in the shade, in the Calle de
Toledo, and were soon encircled by a crowd of spectators. Whilst they
danced, the old woman gathered money among the bystanders, and they
showered it down like stones on the highway; for beauty has such power
that it can awaken slumbering charity. The dance over, Preciosa said,
"If you will give me four quartos, I will sing by myself a beautiful
romance about the churching of our lady the Queen Doña Margarita. It is
a famous composition, by a poet of renown, one who may be called a
captain in the battalion of poets." No sooner had she said this, than
almost every one in the ring cried out, "Sing it, Preciosa; here are my
four quartos;" and so many quartos were thrown down for her, that the
old gitana had not hands enough to pick them up. When the gathering was
ended, Preciosa resumed her tambourine, and sang the promised romance,
which was loudly encored, the whole audience crying out with one voice,
"Sing again, Preciosa, sing again, and dance for us, girl: thou shalt
not want quartos, whilst thou hast the ground beneath thy feet."

Whilst more than two hundred persons were thus looking on at the dance,
and listening to the singing of the gitana, one of the lieutenants of
the city passed by; and seeing so many people together, he asked what
was the occasion of the crowd. Being told that the handsome gitana was
singing there, the lieutenant, who was not without curiosity, drew near
also to listen, but in consideration of his dignity, he did not wait for
the end of the romance. The gitanilla, however, pleased him so much,
that he sent his page to tell the old crone to come to his house that
evening with her troop, as he wished his wife Doña Clara to hear them.
The page delivered the message, and the old gitana promised to attend.

After the performance was ended, and the performers were going
elsewhere, a very well-dressed page came up to Preciosa, and giving her
a folded paper, said, "Pretty Preciosa, will you sing this romance? It
is a very good one, and I will give you others from time to time, by
which you will acquire the fame of having the best romances in the
world."

"I will learn this one with much willingness," replied Preciosa; "and be
sure, señor, you bring me the others you speak of, but on condition that
there is nothing improper in them. If you wish to be paid for them, we
will agree for them by the dozen; but do not expect to be paid in
advance; that will be impossible. When a dozen have been sung, the money
for a dozen shall be forthcoming."

"If the Señora Preciosa only pays me for the paper," said the page, "I
shall be content. Moreover, any romance which does not turn out so well
shall not be counted."

"I will retain the right of choice," said Preciosa; and then she
continued her way with her companions up the street, when some gentlemen
called and beckoned to them from a latticed window. Preciosa went up and
looked through the window, which was near the ground, into a cheerful,
well-furnished apartment, in which several cavaliers were walking about,
and others playing at various games. "Will you give me a share of your
winnings, señors?" said Preciosa, in the lisping accent of the gipsies,
which she spoke not by nature but from choice. At the sight of Preciosa,
and at the sound of her voice, the players quitted the tables, the rest
left off lounging, and all thronged to the window, for her fame had
already reached them. "Come in! Let the little gipsies come in," said
the cavaliers, gaily; "we will certainly give them a share of our
winnings."

"But you might make it cost us dear, señors," said Preciosa.

"No, on the honour of gentlemen," said one, "you may come in, niña, in
full security that no one will touch the sole of your shoe. I swear this
to you by the order I wear on my breast;" and as he spoke he laid his
hand on the cross of the order of Calatrava which he wore.

"If you like to go in, Preciosa," said one of the gitanillas who were
with her, "do so by all means; but I do not choose to go where there are
so many men."

"Look you, Christina," answered Preciosa, "what you have to beware of is
one man alone; where there are so many there is nothing to fear. Of one
thing you may be sure, Christina; the woman who is resolved to be
upright may be so amongst an army of soldiers. It is well, indeed, to
avoid occasions of temptation, but it is not in crowded rooms like this
that danger lurks."

"Well then, let us go in, Preciosa," said her companion, "you know more
than a witch."

The old gipsy also encouraged them to go in, and that decided the
question. As soon as they had entered the room, the cavalier of the
order, seeing the paper which Preciosa carried, stretched out his hand
to take it. "Do not take it from me," she said: "It is a romance but
just given to me, and which I have not yet had time to read."

"And do you know how to read, my girl?" said one of the cavaliers.

"Ay, and to write too," said the old woman. "I have brought up my
grandchild as if she was a lawyer's daughter."

The cavalier opened the paper, and finding a gold crown inclosed in it,
said, "Truly, Preciosa, the contents of this letter are worth the
postage. Here is a crown inclosed in the romance."


