Such, nevertheless, was Leonora's rectitude, and so opportunely did she
manifest it, that all the villanous arts of the crafty seducer were of
no avail; till both of them, wearied by the contest, the baffled tempter
and the victorious defender of her own chastity, fell asleep almost at
the moment when it pleased Heaven that Carrizales should awake in spite
of the ointment. As usual he felt all about the bed, and not finding his
dear wife in it, he jumped up in the utmost consternation, and with
strange agility for a man of his years. He looked all over the room for
her, and when he found the door open, and the key gone from between the
mattresses, he was nearly distracted. Recovering himself a little, he
went out into the gallery, stole softly thence to the saloon, where the
dueña was asleep, and seeing no Leonora there, he went to the dueña's
own room, opened the door gently, and beheld Leonora in Loaysa's arms,
and both of them looking as if the soporific ointment was exerting its
influence over themselves instead of upon the jealous husband.

Carrizales was petrified with horror; his voice stuck in his throat; his
arms fell powerless by his sides, and his feet seemed rooted to the
ground; and though the fierce revulsion of his wrath presently aroused
his torpid senses, he yet could scarcely breathe, so intense was his
anguish. Thirsting for vengeance as terrible as his monstrous wrong, but
having no weapon at hand, he returned to his chamber as stealthily as he
had quitted it, in search of a dagger, with which he would wash out the
stain cast upon his honour in the blood of the guilty pair, and then
massacre his whole household; but he had no sooner reached his room than
his grief again overpowered him, and he fell senseless on the bed.

Day broke now, and found Leonora still in the arms of Loaysa. Marialonso
awoke, and thinking it time to receive what she counted was due to her,
she awoke Leonora, who was shocked to find it so late, and bitterly
accused her own imprudence and the dueña's negligence. With trembling
steps the two women crept up to Felipe's bedroom, praying inwardly to
Heaven that they might find him still snoring; and when they saw him
lying on the bed, apparently asleep, they made no doubt that he was
still under the effect of the opiate, and embraced each other in a
transport of joy. Leonora went up to her husband, and taking him by the
arm, turned him over on his side to see if he would wake without their
being obliged to wash him with vinegar according to the directions
given with the ointment; but the movement roused Carrizales from his
swoon, and heaving a deep sigh, he ejaculated in a faint and piteous
tone, "Miserable man that I am! to what a woeful pass I am come!"

Leonora did not distinctly hear what her husband said; but seeing with
surprise that the effect of the opiate was not so lasting as she had
been led to expect, she bent over him, put her cheek to his, and
pressing him closely in her arms, said, "What ails you, dear señor? You
seem to be complaining?"

Carrizales opened his eyes to their utmost width, and turning them full
upon her, stared at her a long while with a look of profound amazement.
At last he said, "Do me the pleasure, señora, to send instantly for your
parents in my name, and ask them to come hither, for I feel something at
my heart which distresses me exceedingly. I fear I have but a short time
to live, and I should like to see them before I die."

Leonora immediately despatched the negro with this message to her
parents. She fully believed what her husband had told her, and
attributing his danger to the violence of the opiate instead of to its
real cause, she put her arms round his neck, caressed him more fondly
than ever she had done before, and inquired how he felt, with such
tender solicitude, as if she loved him above everything in the world;
while he, on the other hand, continued to gaze upon her with the same
unvarying look of astonishment, every endearing word or caress of hers
being like a dagger to his heart. The dueña had, by this time,
acquainted Loaysa and the domestics with her master's illness, which,
she remarked, was evidently very serious, since he had forgotten to give
orders that the street door should be locked after the negro's departure
to summon her lady's parents. The message was itself a portentous
occurrence, for neither father nor mother had ever set foot within that
house since their daughter's marriage. In short, the whole household was
in anxiety, though no one divined the true cause of the old man's
illness. He lay sighing at intervals, so heavily that every sigh seemed
like the parting of soul and body. Leonora wept to see him in such a
state, whilst he beheld her feigned tears, as he deemed them, with a
bitter smile, that looked like the grin of insanity.

Leonora's parents now arrived, and were struck with no little
misgivings when they found both entrance doors open and the house all
lonely and silent. They went up to their son-in-law's room, and found
him in the posture he had all along maintained, with his eyes immovably
fixed on his wife, whom he held by the hands, whilst both were in tears;
she, because she saw his flow, and he at seeing how deceitfully she
wept. As soon as they entered the room, Carrizales begged them to be
seated, ordered all the domestics to withdraw except Marialonso, then
wiped his eyes, and with a calm voice and an air of perfect composure
addressed them thus:--


