After we had been married about a month, he began to talk of my going
to West Chester in order to embark for Ireland.  However, he did not
hurry me, for we stayed near three weeks longer, and then he sent to
Chester for a coach to meet us at the Black Rock, as they call it, over
against Liverpool.  Thither we went in a fine boat they call a pinnace,
with six oars; his servants, and horses, and baggage going in the
ferry-boat.  He made his excuse to me that he had no acquaintance in
Chester, but he would go before and get some handsome apartment for me
at a private house.  I asked him how long we should stay at Chester.
He said, not at all, any longer than one night or two, but he would
immediately hire a coach to go to Holyhead.  Then I told him he should
by no means give himself the trouble to get private lodgings for one
night or two, for that Chester being a great place, I made no doubt but
there would be very good inns and accommodation enough; so we lodged at
an inn in the West Street, not far from the Cathedral; I forget what
sign it was at.

Here my spouse, talking of my going to Ireland, asked me if I had no
affairs to settle at London before we went off.  I told him No, not of
any great consequence, but what might be done as well by letter from
Dublin.  'Madam,' says he, very respectfully, 'I suppose the greatest
part of your estate, which my sister tells me is most of it in money in
the Bank of England, lies secure enough, but in case it required
transferring, or any way altering its property, it might be necessary
to go up to London and settle those things before we went over.'

I seemed to look strange at it, and told him I knew not what he meant;
that I had no effects in the Bank of England that I knew of; and I
hoped he could not say that I had ever told him I had.  No, he said, I
had not told him so, but his sister had said the greatest part of my
estate lay there.  'And I only mentioned it, me dear,' said he, 'that
if there was any occasion to settle it, or order anything about it, we
might not be obliged to the hazard and trouble of another voyage back
again'; for he added, that he did not care to venture me too much upon
the sea.

I was surprised at this talk, and began to consider very seriously what
the meaning of it must be; and it presently occurred to me that my
friend, who called him brother, had represented me in colours which
were not my due; and I thought, since it was come to that pitch, that I
would know the bottom of it before I went out of England, and before I
should put myself into I knew not whose hands in a strange country.

Upon this I called his sister into my chamber the next morning, and
letting her know the discourse her brother and I had been upon the
evening before, I conjured her to tell me what she had said to him, and
upon what foot it was that she had made this marriage.  She owned that
she had told him that I was a great fortune, and said that she was told
so at London.  'Told so!' says I warmly; 'did I ever tell you so?'  No,
she said, it was true I did not tell her so, but I had said several
times that what I had was in my own disposal.  'I did so,' returned I
very quickly and hastily, 'but I never told you I had anything called a
fortune; no, not that I had #100, or the value of #100, in the world.
Any how did it consist with my being a fortune,' said I, 'that I should
come here into the north of England with you, only upon the account of
living cheap?' At these words, which I spoke warm and high, my husband,
her brother (as she called him), came into the room, and I desired him
to come and sit down, for I had something of moment to say before them
both, which it was absolutely necessary he should hear.

He looked a little disturbed at the assurance with which I seemed to
speak it, and came and sat down by me, having first shut the door; upon
which I began, for I was very much provoked, and turning myself to him,
'I am afraid,' says I, 'my dear' (for I spoke with kindness on his
side), 'that you have a very great abuse put upon you, and an injury
done you never to be repaired in your marrying me, which, however, as I
have had no hand in it, I desire I may be fairly acquitted of it, and
that the blame may lie where it ought to lie, and nowhere else, for I
wash my hands of every part of it.'

'What injury can be done me, my dear,' says he, 'in marrying you.  I
hope it is to my honour and advantage every way.'  'I will soon explain
it to you,' says I, 'and I fear you will have no reason to think
yourself well used; but I will convince you, my dear,' says I again,
'that I have had no hand in it'; and there I stopped a while.

He looked now scared and wild, and began, I believe, to suspect what
followed; however, looking towards me, and saying only, 'Go on,' he sat
silent, as if to hear what I had more to say; so I went on.  'I asked
you last night,' said I, speaking to him, 'if ever I made any boast to
you of my estate, or ever told you I had any estate in the Bank of
England or anywhere else, and you owned I had not, as is most true; and
I desire you will tell me here, before your sister, if ever I gave you
any reason from me to think so, or that ever we had any discourse about
it'; and he owned again I had not, but said I had appeared always as a
woman of fortune, and he depended on it that I was so, and hoped he was
not deceived.  'I am not inquiring yet whether you have been deceived
or not,' said I; 'I fear you have, and I too; but I am clearing myself
from the unjust charge of being concerned in deceiving you.

'I have been now asking your sister if ever I told her of any fortune
or estate I had, or gave her any particulars of it; and she owns I
never did.  Any pray, madam,' said I, turning myself to her, 'be so
just to me, before your brother, to charge me, if you can, if ever I
pretended to you that I had an estate; and why, if I had, should I come
down into this country with you on purpose to spare that little I had,
and live cheap?'  She could not deny one word, but said she had been
told in London that I had a very great fortune, and that it lay in the
Bank of England.


