In the first place, I was removed from all the wickedness of the world
here; I had neither the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, nor the
pride of life.  I had nothing to covet, for I had all that I was now
capable of enjoying; I was lord of the whole manor; or, if I pleased, I
might call myself king or emperor over the whole country which I had
possession of: there were no rivals; I had no competitor, none to dispute
sovereignty or command with me: I might have raised ship-loadings of
corn, but I had no use for it; so I let as little grow as I thought
enough for my occasion.  I had tortoise or turtle enough, but now and
then one was as much as I could put to any use: I had timber enough to
have built a fleet of ships; and I had grapes enough to have made wine,
or to have cured into raisins, to have loaded that fleet when it had been
built.

But all I could make use of was all that was valuable: I had enough to
eat and supply my wants, and what was all the rest to me?  If I killed
more flesh than I could eat, the dog must eat it, or vermin; if I sowed
more corn than I could eat, it must be spoiled; the trees that I cut down
were lying to rot on the ground; I could make no more use of them but for
fuel, and that I had no occasion for but to dress my food.

In a word, the nature and experience of things dictated to me, upon just
reflection, that all the good things of this world are no farther good to
us than they are for our use; and that, whatever we may heap up to give
others, we enjoy just as much as we can use, and no more.  The most
covetous, griping miser in the world would have been cured of the vice of
covetousness if he had been in my case; for I possessed infinitely more
than I knew what to do with.  I had no room for desire, except it was of
things which I had not, and they were but trifles, though, indeed, of
great use to me.  I had, as I hinted before, a parcel of money, as well
gold as silver, about thirty-six pounds sterling.  Alas! there the sorry,
useless stuff lay; I had no more manner of business for it; and often
thought with myself that I would have given a handful of it for a gross
of tobacco-pipes; or for a hand-mill to grind my corn; nay, I would have
given it all for a sixpenny-worth of turnip and carrot seed out of
England, or for a handful of peas and beans, and a bottle of ink.  As it
was, I had not the least advantage by it or benefit from it; but there it
lay in a drawer, and grew mouldy with the damp of the cave in the wet
seasons; and if I had had the drawer full of diamonds, it had been the
same case—they had been of no manner of value to me, because of no use.

I had now brought my state of life to be much easier in itself than it
was at first, and much easier to my mind, as well as to my body.  I
frequently sat down to meat with thankfulness, and admired the hand of
God’s providence, which had thus spread my table in the wilderness.  I
learned to look more upon the bright side of my condition, and less upon
the dark side, and to consider what I enjoyed rather than what I wanted;
and this gave me sometimes such secret comforts, that I cannot express
them; and which I take notice of here, to put those discontented people
in mind of it, who cannot enjoy comfortably what God has given them,
because they see and covet something that He has not given them.  All our
discontents about what we want appeared to me to spring from the want of
thankfulness for what we have.

Another reflection was of great use to me, and doubtless would be so to
any one that should fall into such distress as mine was; and this was, to
compare my present condition with what I at first expected it would be;
nay, with what it would certainly have been, if the good providence of
God had not wonderfully ordered the ship to be cast up nearer to the
shore, where I not only could come at her, but could bring what I got out
of her to the shore, for my relief and comfort; without which, I had
wanted for tools to work, weapons for defence, and gunpowder and shot for
getting my food.

I spent whole hours, I may say whole days, in representing to myself, in
the most lively colours, how I must have acted if I had got nothing out
of the ship.  How I could not have so much as got any food, except fish
and turtles; and that, as it was long before I found any of them, I must
have perished first; that I should have lived, if I had not perished,
like a mere savage; that if I had killed a goat or a fowl, by any
contrivance, I had no way to flay or open it, or part the flesh from the
skin and the bowels, or to cut it up; but must gnaw it with my teeth, and
pull it with my claws, like a beast.

These reflections made me very sensible of the goodness of Providence to
me, and very thankful for my present condition, with all its hardships
and misfortunes; and this part also I cannot but recommend to the
reflection of those who are apt, in their misery, to say, “Is any
affliction like mine?”  Let them consider how much worse the cases of
some people are, and their case might have been, if Providence had
thought fit.

I had another reflection, which assisted me also to comfort my mind with
hopes; and this was comparing my present situation with what I had
deserved, and had therefore reason to expect from the hand of Providence.
I had lived a dreadful life, perfectly destitute of the knowledge and
fear of God.  I had been well instructed by father and mother; neither
had they been wanting to me in their early endeavours to infuse a
religious awe of God into my mind, a sense of my duty, and what the
nature and end of my being required of me.  But, alas! falling early into
the seafaring life, which of all lives is the most destitute of the fear
of God, though His terrors are always before them; I say, falling early
into the seafaring life, and into seafaring company, all that little
sense of religion which I had entertained was laughed out of me by my
messmates; by a hardened despising of dangers, and the views of death,
which grew habitual to me by my long absence from all manner of
opportunities to converse with anything but what was like myself, or to
hear anything that was good or tended towards it.

So void was I of everything that was good, or the least sense of what I
was, or was to be, that, in the greatest deliverances I enjoyed—such as
my escape from Sallee; my being taken up by the Portuguese master of the
ship; my being planted so well in the Brazils; my receiving the cargo
from England, and the like—I never had once the words “Thank God!” so
much as on my mind, or in my mouth; nor in the greatest distress had I so
much as a thought to pray to Him, or so much as to say, “Lord, have mercy
upon me!” no, nor to mention the name of God, unless it was to swear by,
and blaspheme it.


