I was now to enter upon a part of independent life, a thing I was indeed
very ill prepared to manage, for I was perfectly loose and dissolute in my
behaviour, bold and wicked while I was under government, and now perfectly
unfit to be trusted with liberty, for I was as ripe for any villainy as a
young fellow that had no solid thought ever placed in his mind could be
supposed to be. Education, as you have heard, I had none; and all the
little scenes of life I had passed through had been full of dangers and
desperate circumstances; but I was either so young or so stupid, that I
escaped the grief and anxiety of them, for want of having a sense of their
tendency and consequences.

This thoughtless, unconcerned temper had one felicity indeed in it, that it
made me daring and ready for doing any mischief, and kept off the sorrow
which otherwise ought to have attended me when I fell into any mischief;
that this stupidity was instead of a happiness to me, for it left my
thoughts free to act upon means of escape and deliverance in my distress,
however great it might be; whereas my companions in the misery were so sunk
by their fear and grief, that they abandoned themselves to the misery of
their condition, and gave over all thought but of their perishing and
starving, being devoured by wild beasts, murdered, and perhaps eaten by
cannibals, and the like.

I was but a young fellow, about seventeen or eighteen; but hearing what was
to be my fate, I received it with no appearance of discouragement; but I
asked what my master said to it, and being told that he had used his utmost
interest to save me, but the captain had answered I should either go on
shore or be hanged on board, which he pleased, I then gave over all hope of
being received again. I was not very thankful in my thoughts to my master
for his soliciting the captain for me, because I knew that what he did was
not in kindness to me so much as in kindness to himself; I mean, to
preserve the wages which he got for me, which amounted to above six dollars
a month, including what the captain allowed him for my particular service
to him.

When I understood that my master was so apparently kind, I asked if I might
not be admitted to speak with him, and they told me I might, if my master
would come down to me, but I could not be allowed to come up to him; so
then I desired my master might be spoke to to come to me, and he
accordingly came to me. I fell on my knees to him, and begged he would
forgive me what I had done to displease him; and indeed the resolution I
had taken to murder him lay with some horror upon my mind just at that
time, so that I was once just a-going to confess it, and beg him to forgive
me, but I kept it in. He told me he had done all he could to obtain my
pardon of the captain, but could not and he knew no way for me but to have
patience, and submit to my fate; and if they came to speak with any ship of
their nation at the Cape, he would endeavour to have them stand in, and
fetch us off again, if we might be found.

Then I begged I might have my clothes on shore with me. He told me he was
afraid I should have little need of clothes, for he did not see how we
could long subsist on the island, and that he had been told that the
inhabitants were cannibals or men-eaters (though he had no reason for that
suggestion), and we should not be able to live among them. I told him I was
not so afraid of that as I was of starving for want of victuals; and as for
the inhabitants being cannibals, I believed we should be more likely to eat
them than they us, if we could but get at them. But I was mightily
concerned, I said, we should have no weapons with us to defend ourselves,
and I begged nothing now, but that he would give me a gun and a sword, with
a little powder and shot.

He smiled, and said they would signify nothing to us, for it was impossible
for us to pretend to preserve our lives among such a populous and desperate
nation as the people of this island were. I told him that, however, it
would do us this good, for we should not be devoured or destroyed
immediately; so I begged hard for the gun. At last he told me he did not
know whether the captain would give him leave to give me a gun, and if not,
he durst not do it; but he promised to use his interest to obtain it for
me, which he did, and the next day he sent me a gun, with some ammunition,
but told me the captain would not suffer the ammunition to be given us till
we were set all on shore, and till he was just going to set sail. He also
sent me the few clothes I had in the ship, which indeed were not many.

Two days after this, we were all carried on shore together; the rest of my
fellow-criminals hearing I had a gun, and some powder and shot, solicited
for liberty to carry the like with them, which was also granted them; and
thus we were set on shore to shift for ourselves.

At our first coming into the island we were terrified exceedingly with the
sight of the barbarous people, whose figure was made more terrible to us
than it really was by the report we had of them from the seamen; but when
we came to converse with them awhile, we found they were not cannibals, as
was reported, or such as would fall immediately upon us and eat us up; but
they came and sat down by us, and wondered much at our clothes and arms,
and made signs to give us some victuals, such as they had, which was only
roots and plants dug out of the ground for the present, but they brought us
fowls and flesh afterwards in good plenty.

This encouraged the other four men that were with me very much, for they
were quite dejected before; but now they began to be very familiar with
them, and made signs, that if they would use us kindly, we would stay and
live with them; which they seemed glad of, though they knew little of the
necessity we were under to do so, or how much we were afraid of them.

However, upon second thoughts we resolved that we would only stay in that
part so long as the ship rid in the bay, and then making them believe we
were gone with the ship, we would go and place ourselves, if possible,
where there were no inhabitants to be seen, and so live as we could, or
perhaps watch for a ship that might be driven upon the coast as we were.

The ship continued a fortnight in the roads, repairing some damage which
had been done her in the late storm, and taking in wood and water; and
during this time, the boat coming often on shore, the men brought us
several refreshments, and the natives believing we only belonged to the
ship, were civil enough. We lived in a kind of a tent on the shore, or
rather a hut, which we made with the boughs of trees, and sometimes in the
night retired to a wood a little out of their way, to let them think we
were gone on board the ship. However, we found them barbarous, treacherous,
and villainous enough in their nature, only civil from fear, and therefore
concluded we should soon fall into their hands when the ship was gone.

The sense of this wrought upon my fellow-sufferers even to distraction; and
one of them, being a carpenter, in his mad fit, swam off to the ship in the
night, though she lay then a league to sea, and made such pitiful moan to
be taken in, that the captain was prevailed with at last to take him in,
though they let him lie swimming three hours in the water before he
consented to it.

Upon this, and his humble submission, the captain received him, and, in a
word, the importunity of this man (who for some time petitioned to be taken
in, though they hanged him as soon as they had him) was such as could not
be resisted; for, after he had swam so long about the ship, he was not able
to reach the shore again; and the captain saw evidently that the man must
be taken on board or suffered to drown, and the whole ship's company
offering to be bound for him for his good behaviour, the captain at last
yielded, and he was taken up, but almost dead with his being so long in the
water.

