My raft was now strong enough to bear any reasonable weight.  My next
care was what to load it with, and how to preserve what I laid upon it
from the surf of the sea; but I was not long considering this.  I first
laid all the planks or boards upon it that I could get, and having
considered well what I most wanted, I got three of the seamen’s chests,
which I had broken open, and emptied, and lowered them down upon my raft;
the first of these I filled with provisions—viz. bread, rice, three Dutch
cheeses, five pieces of dried goat’s flesh (which we lived much upon),
and a little remainder of European corn, which had been laid by for some
fowls which we brought to sea with us, but the fowls were killed.  There
had been some barley and wheat together; but, to my great disappointment,
I found afterwards that the rats had eaten or spoiled it all.  As for
liquors, I found several, cases of bottles belonging to our skipper, in
which were some cordial waters; and, in all, about five or six gallons of
rack.  These I stowed by themselves, there being no need to put them into
the chest, nor any room for them.  While I was doing this, I found the
tide begin to flow, though very calm; and I had the mortification to see
my coat, shirt, and waistcoat, which I had left on the shore, upon the
sand, swim away.  As for my breeches, which were only linen, and
open-kneed, I swam on board in them and my stockings.  However, this set
me on rummaging for clothes, of which I found enough, but took no more
than I wanted for present use, for I had others things which my eye was
more upon—as, first, tools to work with on shore.  And it was after long
searching that I found out the carpenter’s chest, which was, indeed, a
very useful prize to me, and much more valuable than a shipload of gold
would have been at that time.  I got it down to my raft, whole as it was,
without losing time to look into it, for I knew in general what it
contained.

My next care was for some ammunition and arms.  There were two very good
fowling-pieces in the great cabin, and two pistols.  These I secured
first, with some powder-horns and a small bag of shot, and two old rusty
swords.  I knew there were three barrels of powder in the ship, but knew
not where our gunner had stowed them; but with much search I found them,
two of them dry and good, the third had taken water.  Those two I got to
my raft with the arms.  And now I thought myself pretty well freighted,
and began to think how I should get to shore with them, having neither
sail, oar, nor rudder; and the least capful of wind would have overset
all my navigation.

I had three encouragements—1st, a smooth, calm sea; 2ndly, the tide
rising, and setting in to the shore; 3rdly, what little wind there was
blew me towards the land.  And thus, having found two or three broken
oars belonging to the boat—and, besides the tools which were in the
chest, I found two saws, an axe, and a hammer; with this cargo I put to
sea.  For a mile or thereabouts my raft went very well, only that I found
it drive a little distant from the place where I had landed before; by
which I perceived that there was some indraft of the water, and
consequently I hoped to find some creek or river there, which I might
make use of as a port to get to land with my cargo.

As I imagined, so it was.  There appeared before me a little opening of
the land, and I found a strong current of the tide set into it; so I
guided my raft as well as I could, to keep in the middle of the stream.

But here I had like to have suffered a second shipwreck, which, if I had,
I think verily would have broken my heart; for, knowing nothing of the
coast, my raft ran aground at one end of it upon a shoal, and not being
aground at the other end, it wanted but a little that all my cargo had
slipped off towards the end that was afloat, and to fallen into the
water.  I did my utmost, by setting my back against the chests, to keep
them in their places, but could not thrust off the raft with all my
strength; neither durst I stir from the posture I was in; but holding up
the chests with all my might, I stood in that manner near half-an-hour,
in which time the rising of the water brought me a little more upon a
level; and a little after, the water still-rising, my raft floated again,
and I thrust her off with the oar I had into the channel, and then
driving up higher, I at length found myself in the mouth of a little
river, with land on both sides, and a strong current of tide running up.
I looked on both sides for a proper place to get to shore, for I was not
willing to be driven too high up the river: hoping in time to see some
ships at sea, and therefore resolved to place myself as near the coast as
I could.

At length I spied a little cove on the right shore of the creek, to which
with great pain and difficulty I guided my raft, and at last got so near
that, reaching ground with my oar, I could thrust her directly in.  But
here I had like to have dipped all my cargo into the sea again; for that
shore lying pretty steep—that is to say sloping—there was no place to
land, but where one end of my float, if it ran on shore, would lie so
high, and the other sink lower, as before, that it would endanger my
cargo again.  All that I could do was to wait till the tide was at the
highest, keeping the raft with my oar like an anchor, to hold the side of
it fast to the shore, near a flat piece of ground, which I expected the
water would flow over; and so it did.  As soon as I found water
enough—for my raft drew about a foot of water—I thrust her upon that flat
piece of ground, and there fastened or moored her, by sticking my two
broken oars into the ground, one on one side near one end, and one on the
other side near the other end; and thus I lay till the water ebbed away,
and left my raft and all my cargo safe on shore.

My next work was to view the country, and seek a proper place for my
habitation, and where to stow my goods to secure them from whatever might
happen.  Where I was, I yet knew not; whether on the continent or on an
island; whether inhabited or not inhabited; whether in danger of wild
beasts or not.  There was a hill not above a mile from me, which rose up
very steep and high, and which seemed to overtop some other hills, which
lay as in a ridge from it northward.  I took out one of the
fowling-pieces, and one of the pistols, and a horn of powder; and thus
armed, I travelled for discovery up to the top of that hill, where, after
I had with great labour and difficulty got to the top, I saw my fate, to
my great affliction—viz. that I was in an island environed every way with
the sea: no land to be seen except some rocks, which lay a great way off;
and two small islands, less than this, which lay about three leagues to
the west.

I found also that the island I was in was barren, and, as I saw good
reason to believe, uninhabited except by wild beasts, of whom, however, I
saw none.  Yet I saw abundance of fowls, but knew not their kinds;
neither when I killed them could I tell what was fit for food, and what
not.  At my coming back, I shot at a great bird which I saw sitting upon
a tree on the side of a great wood.  I believe it was the first gun that
had been fired there since the creation of the world.  I had no sooner
fired, than from all parts of the wood there arose an innumerable number
of fowls, of many sorts, making a confused screaming and crying, and
every one according to his usual note, but not one of them of any kind
that I knew.  As for the creature I killed, I took it to be a kind of
hawk, its colour and beak resembling it, but it had no talons or claws
more than common.  Its flesh was carrion, and fit for nothing.

Contented with this discovery, I came back to my raft, and fell to work
to bring my cargo on shore, which took me up the rest of that day.  What
to do with myself at night I knew not, nor indeed where to rest, for I
was afraid to lie down on the ground, not knowing but some wild beast
might devour me, though, as I afterwards found, there was really no need
for those fears.


