There were indeed two or three indefatigable men among them, by whose
courage and industry all the rest were upheld; and indeed those two or
three were the managers of them from the beginning; that was the gunner,
and that cutler whom I call the artist; and the third, who was pretty well,
though not like either of them, was one of the carpenters. These indeed
were the life and soul of all the rest, and it was to their courage that
all the rest owed the resolution they showed upon any occasion. But when
those saw me take a little upon me, as above, they embraced me, and treated
me with particular affection ever after.

This gunner was an excellent mathematician, a good scholar, and a complete
sailor; and it was in conversing intimately with him that I learned
afterwards the grounds of what knowledge I have since had in all the
sciences useful for navigation, and particularly in the geographical part
of knowledge.

Even in our conversation, finding me eager to understand and learn, he laid
the foundation of a general knowledge of things in my mind, gave me just
ideas of the form of the earth and of the sea, the situation of countries,
the course of rivers, the doctrine of the spheres, the motion of the stars;
and, in a word, taught me a kind of system of astronomy, which I afterwards
improved.

In an especial manner, he filled my head with aspiring thoughts, and with
an earnest desire after learning everything that could be taught me;
convincing me, that nothing could qualify me for great undertakings, but a
degree of learning superior to what was usual in the race of seamen; he
told me, that to be ignorant was to be certain of a mean station in the
world, but that knowledge was the first step to preferment. He was always
flattering me with my capacity to learn; and though that fed my pride, yet,
on the other hand, as I had a secret ambition, which just at that time fed
itself in my mind, it prompted in me an insatiable thirst after learning in
general, and I resolved, if ever I came back to Europe, and had anything
left to purchase it, I would make myself master of all the parts of
learning needful to the making of me a complete sailor; but I was not so
just to myself afterwards as to do it when I had an opportunity.

But to return to our business; the gunner, when he saw the service I had
done in the fight, and heard my proposal for keeping a number of prisoners
for our march, and for carrying our baggage, turns to me before them all.
"Captain Bob," says he, "I think you must be our leader, for all the
success of this enterprise is owing to you." "No, no," said I, "do not
compliment me; you shall be our Seignior Capitanio, you shall be general; I
am too young for it." So, in short, we all agreed he should be our leader;
but he would not accept of it alone, but would have me joined with him; and
all the rest agreeing, I was obliged to comply.

The first piece of service they put me upon in this new command was as
difficult as any they could think of, and that was to manage the prisoners;
which, however, I cheerfully undertook, as you shall hear presently. But
the immediate consultation was yet of more consequence; and that was,
first, which way we should go; and secondly, how to furnish ourselves for
the voyage with provisions.

There was among the prisoners one tall, well-shaped, handsome fellow, to
whom the rest seemed to pay great respect, and who, as we understood
afterwards, was the son of one of their kings; his father was, it seems,
killed at our first volley, and he wounded with a shot in his arm, and with
another just on one of his hips or haunches. The shot in his haunch being
in a fleshy part, bled much, and he was half dead with the loss of blood.
As to the shot in his arm, it had broke his wrist, and he was by both these
wounds quite disabled, so that we were once going to turn him away, and let
him die; and, if we had, he would have died indeed in a few days more: but,
as I found the man had some respect showed him, it presently occurred to my
thoughts that we might bring him to be useful to us, and perhaps make him a
kind of commander over them. So I caused our surgeon to take him in hand,
and gave the poor wretch good words, that is to say, I spoke to him as well
as I could by signs, to make him understand that we would make him well
again.

This created a new awe in their minds of us, believing that, as we could
kill at a distance by something invisible to them (for so our shot was, to
be sure), so we could make them well again too. Upon this the young prince
(for so we called him afterwards) called six or seven of the savages to
him, and said something to them; what it was we know not, but immediately
all the seven came to me, and kneeled down to me, holding up their hands,
and making signs of entreaty, pointing to the place where one of those lay
whom we had killed.


