"THAT woman is not losing," she said. "To whom does she belong? Do you
know her? Who is she?"

"She is, I believe, a Frenchwoman," I replied.

"Ah! A bird of passage, evidently. Besides, I can see that she has her
shoes polished. Now, explain to me the meaning of each round in the
game, and the way in which one ought to stake."

Upon this I set myself to explain the meaning of all the
combinations--of "rouge et noir," of "pair et impair," of "manque et
passe," with, lastly, the different values in the system of numbers.
The Grandmother listened attentively, took notes, put questions in
various forms, and laid the whole thing to heart. Indeed, since an
example of each system of stakes kept constantly occurring, a great
deal of information could be assimilated with ease and celerity. The
Grandmother was vastly pleased.

"But what is zero?" she inquired. "Just now I heard the flaxen-haired
croupier call out 'zero!' And why does he keep raking in all the money
that is on the table? To think that he should grab the whole pile for
himself! What does zero mean?"

"Zero is what the bank takes for itself. If the wheel stops at that
figure, everything lying on the table becomes the absolute property of
the bank. Also, whenever the wheel has begun to turn, the bank ceases
to pay out anything."

"Then I should receive nothing if I were staking?"

"No; unless by any chance you had PURPOSELY staked on zero; in which
case you would receive thirty-five times the value of your stake."

"Why thirty-five times, when zero so often turns up? And if so, why do
not more of these fools stake upon it?"

"Because the number of chances against its occurrence is thirty-six."

"Rubbish! Potapitch, Potapitch! Come here, and I will give you some
money." The old lady took out of her pocket a tightly-clasped purse,
and extracted from its depths a ten-gulden piece. "Go at once, and
stake that upon zero."

"But, Madame, zero has only this moment turned up," I remonstrated;
"wherefore, it may not do so again for ever so long. Wait a little, and
you may then have a better chance."

"Rubbish! Stake, please."

"Pardon me, but zero might not turn up again until, say, tonight, even
though you had staked thousands upon it. It often happens so."

"Rubbish, rubbish! Who fears the wolf should never enter the forest.
What? We have lost? Then stake again."

A second ten-gulden piece did we lose, and then I put down a third. The
Grandmother could scarcely remain seated in her chair, so intent was
she upon the little ball as it leapt through the notches of the
ever-revolving wheel. However, the third ten-gulden piece followed the
first two. Upon this the Grandmother went perfectly crazy. She could no
longer sit still, and actually struck the table with her fist when the
croupier cried out, "Trente-six," instead of the desiderated zero.

"To listen to him!" fumed the old lady. "When will that accursed zero
ever turn up? I cannot breathe until I see it. I believe that that
infernal croupier is PURPOSELY keeping it from turning up. Alexis
Ivanovitch, stake TWO golden pieces this time. The moment we cease to
stake, that cursed zero will come turning up, and we shall get nothing."

"My good Madame--"

"Stake, stake! It is not YOUR money."

Accordingly I staked two ten-gulden pieces. The ball went hopping round
the wheel until it began to settle through the notches. Meanwhile the
Grandmother sat as though petrified, with my hand convulsively clutched
in hers.

"Zero!" called the croupier.

"There! You see, you see!" cried the old lady, as she turned and faced
me, wreathed in smiles. "I told you so! It was the Lord God himself who
suggested to me to stake those two coins. Now, how much ought I to
receive? Why do they not pay it out to me? Potapitch! Martha! Where are
they? What has become of our party? Potapitch, Potapitch!"

"Presently, Madame," I whispered. "Potapitch is outside, and they would
decline to admit him to these rooms. See! You are being paid out your
money. Pray take it." The croupiers were making up a heavy packet of
coins, sealed in blue paper, and containing fifty ten gulden pieces,
together with an unsealed packet containing another twenty. I handed
the whole to the old lady in a money-shovel.

"Faites le jeu, messieurs! Faites le jeu, messieurs! Rien ne va plus,"
proclaimed the croupier as once more he invited the company to stake,
and prepared to turn the wheel.

"We shall be too late! He is going to spin again! Stake, stake!" The
Grandmother was in a perfect fever. "Do not hang back! Be quick!" She
seemed almost beside herself, and nudged me as hard as she could.

"Upon what shall I stake, Madame?"

"Upon zero, upon zero! Again upon zero! Stake as much as ever you can.
How much have we got? Seventy ten-gulden pieces? We shall not miss
them, so stake twenty pieces at a time."

"Think a moment, Madame. Sometimes zero does not turn up for two
hundred rounds in succession. I assure you that you may lose all your
capital."


