"You have a sister?" asked the count.

"Yes, monsieur, a most excellent sister."

"Married?"

"Nearly nine years."

"Happy?" asked the count again.

"As happy as it is permitted to a human creature to be," replied
Maximilian. "She married the man she loved, who remained faithful to
us in our fallen fortunes--Emmanuel Herbaut." Monte Cristo smiled
imperceptibly. "I live there during my leave of absence," continued
Maximilian; "and I shall be, together with my brother-in-law Emmanuel,
at the disposition of the Count, whenever he thinks fit to honor us."

"One minute," cried Albert, without giving Monte Cristo the time to
reply. "Take care, you are going to immure a traveller, Sinbad the
Sailor, a man who comes to see Paris; you are going to make a patriarch
of him."

"Oh, no," said Morrel; "my sister is five and twenty, my brother-in-law
is thirty, they are gay, young, and happy. Besides, the count will be in
his own house, and only see them when he thinks fit to do so."

"Thanks, monsieur," said Monte Cristo; "I shall content myself with
being presented to your sister and her husband, if you will do me the
honor to introduce me; but I cannot accept the offer of any one of these
gentlemen, since my habitation is already prepared."

"What," cried Morcerf; "you are, then, going to an hotel--that will be
very dull for you."

"Was I so badly lodged at Rome?" said Monte Cristo smiling.

"Parbleu, at Rome you spent fifty thousand piastres in furnishing your
apartments, but I presume that you are not disposed to spend a similar
sum every day."

"It is not that which deterred me," replied Monte Cristo; "but as I
determined to have a house to myself, I sent on my valet de chambre, and
he ought by this time to have bought the house and furnished it."

"But you have, then, a valet de chambre who knows Paris?" said
Beauchamp.

"It is the first time he has ever been in Paris. He is black, and cannot
speak," returned Monte Cristo.

"It is Ali!" cried Albert, in the midst of the general surprise.

"Yes, Ali himself, my Nubian mute, whom you saw, I think, at Rome."

"Certainly," said Morcerf; "I recollect him perfectly. But how could you
charge a Nubian to purchase a house, and a mute to furnish it?--he will
do everything wrong."

"Undeceive yourself, monsieur," replied Monte Cristo; "I am quite sure,
that, on the contrary, he will choose everything as I wish. He knows
my tastes, my caprices, my wants. He has been here a week, with the
instinct of a hound, hunting by himself. He will arrange everything for
me. He knew, that I should arrive to-day at ten o'clock; he was waiting
for me at nine at the Barriere de Fontainebleau. He gave me this paper;
it contains the number of my new abode; read it yourself," and Monte
Cristo passed a paper to Albert. "Ah, that is really original," said
Beauchamp.

"And very princely," added Chateau-Renaud.

"What, do you not know your house?" asked Debray.

"No," said Monte Cristo; "I told you I did not wish to be behind my
time; I dressed myself in the carriage, and descended at the viscount's
door." The young men looked at each other; they did not know if it was
a comedy Monte Cristo was playing, but every word he uttered had such
an air of simplicity, that it was impossible to suppose what he said
was false--besides, why should he tell a falsehood? "We must content
ourselves, then," said Beauchamp, "with rendering the count all the
little services in our power. I, in my quality of journalist, open all
the theatres to him."

"Thanks, monsieur," returned Monte Cristo, "my steward has orders to
take a box at each theatre."


