From that moment Boxtel's interest in tulips was no longer a stimulus to
his exertions, but a deadening anxiety. Henceforth all his thoughts ran
only upon the injury which his neighbour would cause him, and thus his
favourite occupation was changed into a constant source of misery to
him.

Van Baerle, as may easily be imagined, had no sooner begun to apply his
natural ingenuity to his new fancy, than he succeeded in growing the
finest tulips. Indeed; he knew better than any one else at Haarlem or
Leyden--the two towns which boast the best soil and the most congenial
climate--how to vary the colours, to modify the shape, and to produce
new species.

He belonged to that natural, humorous school who took for their motto in
the seventeenth century the aphorism uttered by one of their number in
1653,--"To despise flowers is to offend God."

From that premise the school of tulip-fanciers, the most exclusive of
all schools, worked out the following syllogism in the same year:--

"To despise flowers is to offend God.

"The more beautiful the flower is, the more does one offend God in
despising it.

"The tulip is the most beautiful of all flowers.

"Therefore, he who despises the tulip offends God beyond measure."

By reasoning of this kind, it can be seen that the four or five thousand
tulip-growers of Holland, France, and Portugal, leaving out those of
Ceylon and China and the Indies, might, if so disposed, put the whole
world under the ban, and condemn as schismatics and heretics and
deserving of death the several hundred millions of mankind whose hopes
of salvation were not centred upon the tulip.

We cannot doubt that in such a cause Boxtel, though he was Van Baerle's
deadly foe, would have marched under the same banner with him.

Mynheer van Baerle and his tulips, therefore, were in the mouth of
everybody; so much so, that Boxtel's name disappeared for ever from the
list of the notable tulip-growers in Holland, and those of Dort were now
represented by Cornelius van Baerle, the modest and inoffensive savant.

Engaging, heart and soul, in his pursuits of sowing, planting, and
gathering, Van Baerle, caressed by the whole fraternity of tulip-growers
in Europe, entertained nor the least suspicion that there was at his
very door a pretender whose throne he had usurped.

He went on in his career, and consequently in his triumphs; and in
the course of two years he covered his borders with such marvellous
productions as no mortal man, following in the tracks of the Creator,
except perhaps Shakespeare and Rubens, have equalled in point of
numbers.

And also, if Dante had wished for a new type to be added to his
characters of the Inferno, he might have chosen Boxtel during the period
of Van Baerle's successes. Whilst Cornelius was weeding, manuring,
watering his beds, whilst, kneeling on the turf border, he analysed
every vein of the flowering tulips, and meditated on the modifications
which might be effected by crosses of colour or otherwise, Boxtel,
concealed behind a small sycamore which he had trained at the top of the
partition wall in the shape of a fan, watched, with his eyes starting
from their sockets and with foaming mouth, every step and every gesture
of his neighbour; and whenever he thought he saw him look happy, or
descried a smile on his lips, or a flash of contentment glistening in
his eyes, he poured out towards him such a volley of maledictions
and furious threats as to make it indeed a matter of wonder that
this venomous breath of envy and hatred did not carry a blight on the
innocent flowers which had excited it.

When the evil spirit has once taken hold of the heart of man, it urges
him on, without letting him stop. Thus Boxtel soon was no longer content
with seeing Van Baerle. He wanted to see his flowers, too; he had
the feelings of an artist, the master-piece of a rival engrossed his
interest.

He therefore bought a telescope, which enabled him to watch as
accurately as did the owner himself every progressive development of
the flower, from the moment when, in the first year, its pale seed-leaf
begins to peep from the ground, to that glorious one, when, after five
years, its petals at last reveal the hidden treasures of its chalice.
How often had the miserable, jealous man to observe in Van Baerle's beds
tulips which dazzled him by their beauty, and almost choked him by their
perfection!

And then, after the first blush of the admiration which he could not
help feeling, he began to be tortured by the pangs of envy, by that slow
fever which creeps over the heart and changes it into a nest of vipers,
each devouring the other and ever born anew. How often did Boxtel, in
the midst of tortures which no pen is able fully to describe,--how
often did he feel an inclination to jump down into the garden during the
night, to destroy the plants, to tear the bulbs with his teeth, and to
sacrifice to his wrath the owner himself, if he should venture to stand
up for the defence of his tulips!


