"Well, well!" and d'Artagnan rushed into Athos's chamber.

"Come, speak!" said the latter, closing the door and bolting it, that
they might not be disturbed. "Is the king dead? Have you killed the
cardinal? You are quite upset! Come, come, tell me; I am dying with
curiosity and uneasiness!"

"Athos," said d'Artagnan, getting rid of his female garments, and
appearing in his shirt, "prepare yourself to hear an incredible, an
unheard-of story."

"Well, but put on this dressing gown first," said the Musketeer to his
friend.

D'Artagnan donned the robe as quickly as he could, mistaking one sleeve
for the other, so greatly was he still agitated.

"Well?" said Athos.

"Well," replied d'Artagnan, bending his mouth to Athos's ear, and
lowering his voice, "Milady is marked with a FLEUR-DE-LIS upon her
shoulder!"

"Ah!" cried the Musketeer, as if he had received a ball in his heart.

"Let us see," said d'Artagnan. "Are you SURE that the OTHER is dead?"

"THE OTHER?" said Athos, in so stifled a voice that d'Artagnan scarcely
heard him.

"Yes, she of whom you told me one day at Amiens."

Athos uttered a groan, and let his head sink on his hands.

"This is a woman of twenty-six or twenty-eight years."

"Fair," said Athos, "is she not?"

"Very."

"Blue and clear eyes, of a strange brilliancy, with black eyelids and
eyebrows?"

"Yes."

"Tall, well-made? She has lost a tooth, next to the eyetooth on the
left?"

"Yes."

"The FLEUR-DE-LIS is small, rosy in color, and looks as if efforts had
been made to efface it by the application of poultices?"

"Yes."

"But you say she is English?"

"She is called Milady, but she may be French. Lord de Winter is only her
brother-in-law."

"I will see her, d'Artagnan!"

"Beware, Athos, beware. You tried to kill her; she is a woman to return
you the like, and not to fail."

"She will not dare to say anything; that would be to denounce herself."

"She is capable of anything or everything. Did you ever see her
furious?"

"No," said Athos.

"A tigress, a panther! Ah, my dear Athos, I am greatly afraid I have
drawn a terrible vengeance on both of us!"

D'Artagnan then related all--the mad passion of Milady and her menaces
of death.

"You are right; and upon my soul, I would give my life for a hair," said
Athos. "Fortunately, the day after tomorrow we leave Paris. We are going
according to all probability to La Rochelle, and once gone--"

"She will follow you to the end of the world, Athos, if she recognizes
you. Let her, then, exhaust her vengeance on me alone!"

"My dear friend, of what consequence is it if she kills me?" said Athos.
"Do you, perchance, think I set any great store by life?"

"There is something horribly mysterious under all this, Athos; this
woman is one of the cardinal's spies, I am sure of that."

"In that case, take care! If the cardinal does not hold you in high
admiration for the affair of London, he entertains a great hatred for
you; but as, considering everything, he cannot accuse you openly, and
as hatred must be satisfied, particularly when it's a cardinal's hatred,
take care of yourself. If you go out, do not go out alone; when you
eat, use every precaution. Mistrust everything, in short, even your own
shadow."

"Fortunately," said d'Artagnan, "all this will be only necessary till
after tomorrow evening, for when once with the army, we shall have, I
hope, only men to dread."

"In the meantime," said Athos, "I renounce my plan of seclusion, and
wherever you go, I will go with you. You must return to the Rue des
Fossoyeurs; I will accompany you."

"But however near it may be," replied d'Artagnan, "I cannot go thither
in this guise."

"That's true," said Athos, and he rang the bell.

Grimaud entered.

Athos made him a sign to go to d'Artagnan's residence, and bring
back some clothes. Grimaud replied by another sign that he understood
perfectly, and set off.

"All this will not advance your outfit," said Athos; "for if I am not
mistaken, you have left the best of your apparel with Milady, and she
will certainly not have the politeness to return it to you. Fortunately,
you have the sapphire."

"The jewel is yours, my dear Athos! Did you not tell me it was a family
jewel?"

"Yes, my grandfather gave two thousand crowns for it, as he once told
me. It formed part of the nuptial present he made his wife, and it is
magnificent. My mother gave it to me, and I, fool as I was, instead of
keeping the ring as a holy relic, gave it to this wretch."

"Then, my friend, take back this ring, to which I see you attach much
value."

"I take back the ring, after it has passed through the hands of that
infamous creature? Never; that ring is defiled, d'Artagnan."

"Sell it, then."

"Sell a jewel which came from my mother! I vow I should consider it a
profanation."

"Pledge it, then; you can borrow at least a thousand crowns on it. With
that sum you can extricate yourself from your present difficulties; and
when you are full of money again, you can redeem it, and take it back
cleansed from its ancient stains, as it will have passed through the
hands of usurers."

Athos smiled.

"You are a capital companion, d'Artagnan," said be; "your never-failing
cheerfulness raises poor souls in affliction. Well, let us pledge the
ring, but upon one condition."

"What?"

"That there shall be five hundred crowns for you, and five hundred
crowns for me."

"Don't dream it, Athos. I don't need the quarter of such a sum--I who am
still only in the Guards--and by selling my saddles, I shall procure it.
What do I want? A horse for Planchet, that's all. Besides, you forget
that I have a ring likewise."

"To which you attach more value, it seems, than I do to mine; at least,
I have thought so."

"Yes, for in any extreme circumstance it might not only extricate us
from some great embarrassment, but even a great danger. It is not only a
valuable diamond, but it is an enchanted talisman."

"I don't at all understand you, but I believe all you say to be true.
Let us return to my ring, or rather to yours. You shall take half the
sum that will be advanced upon it, or I will throw it into the Seine;
and I doubt, as was the case with Polycrates, whether any fish will be
sufficiently complaisant to bring it back to us."

"Well, I will take it, then," said d'Artagnan.

At this moment Grimaud returned, accompanied by Planchet; the latter,
anxious about his master and curious to know what had happened to him,
had taken advantage of the opportunity and brought the garments himself.


d'Artagnan dressed himself, and Athos did the same. When the two were
ready to go out, the latter made Grimaud the sign of a man taking aim,
and the lackey immediately took down his musketoon, and prepared to
follow his master.

They arrived without accident at the Rue des Fossoyeurs. Bonacieux was
standing at the door, and looked at d'Artagnan hatefully.

"Make haste, dear lodger," said he; "there is a very pretty girl waiting
for you upstairs; and you know women don't like to be kept waiting."

"That's Kitty!" said d'Artagnan to himself, and darted into the passage.


