Porthos observed a last struggle between love and avarice.

"And as," continued he, "the duchess whom you saw at the church
has estates near to those of my family, we mean to make the journey
together. Journeys, you know, appear much shorter when we travel two in
company."

"Have you no friends in Paris, then, Monsieur Porthos?" said the
procurator's wife.

"I thought I had," said Porthos, resuming his melancholy air; "but I
have been taught my mistake."

"You have some!" cried the procurator's wife, in a transport that
surprised even herself. "Come to our house tomorrow. You are the son of
my aunt, consequently my cousin; you come from Noyon, in Picardy; you
have several lawsuits and no attorney. Can you recollect all that?"

"Perfectly, madame."

"Come at dinnertime."

"Very well."

"And be upon your guard before my husband, who is rather shrewd,
notwithstanding his seventy-six years."

"Seventy-six years! PESTE! That's a fine age!" replied Porthos.

"A great age, you mean, Monsieur Porthos. Yes, the poor man may be
expected to leave me a widow, any hour," continued she, throwing a
significant glance at Porthos. "Fortunately, by our marriage contract,
the survivor takes everything."

"All?"

"Yes, all."

"You are a woman of precaution, I see, my dear Madame Coquenard," said
Porthos, squeezing the hand of the procurator's wife tenderly.

"We are then reconciled, dear Monsieur Porthos?" said she, simpering.

"For life," replied Porthos, in the same manner.

"Till we meet again, then, dear traitor!"

"Till we meet again, my forgetful charmer!"

"Tomorrow, my angel!"

"Tomorrow, flame of my life!"





30 D'ARTAGNAN AND THE ENGLISHMAN

D'Artagnan followed Milady without being perceived by her. He saw her
get into her carriage, and heard her order the coachman to drive to St.
Germain.

It was useless to try to keep pace on foot with a carriage drawn by two
powerful horses. D'Artagnan therefore returned to the Rue Ferou.

In the Rue de Seine he met Planchet, who had stopped before the house
of a pastry cook, and was contemplating with ecstasy a cake of the most
appetizing appearance.

He ordered him to go and saddle two horses in M. de Treville's
stables--one for himself, d'Artagnan, and one for Planchet--and bring
them to Athens's place. Once for all, Treville had placed his stable at
d'Artagnan's service.

Planchet proceeded toward the Rue du Colombier, and d'Artagnan toward
the Rue Ferou. Athos was at home, emptying sadly a bottle of the famous
Spanish wine he had brought back with him from his journey into Picardy.
He made a sign for Grimaud to bring a glass for d'Artagnan, and Grimaud
obeyed as usual.

D'Artagnan related to Athos all that had passed at the church between
Porthos and the procurator's wife, and how their comrade was probably by
that time in a fair way to be equipped.

"As for me," replied Athos to this recital, "I am quite at my ease; it
will not be women that will defray the expense of my outfit."

"Handsome, well-bred, noble lord as you are, my dear Athos, neither
princesses nor queens would be secure from your amorous solicitations."

"How young this d'Artagnan is!" said Athos, shrugging his shoulders; and
he made a sign to Grimaud to bring another bottle.

At that moment Planchet put his head modestly in at the half-open door,
and told his master that the horses were ready.

"What horses?" asked Athos.

"Two horses that Monsieur de Treville lends me at my pleasure, and with
which I am now going to take a ride to St. Germain."

"Well, and what are you going to do at St. Germain?" then demanded
Athos.

Then d'Artagnan described the meeting which he had at the church, and
how he had found that lady who, with the seigneur in the black cloak and
with the scar near his temple, filled his mind constantly.

"That is to say, you are in love with this lady as you were with Madame
Bonacieux," said Athos, shrugging his shoulders contemptuously, as if he
pitied human weakness.

"I? not at all!" said d'Artagnan. "I am only curious to unravel the
mystery to which she is attached. I do not know why, but I imagine that
this woman, wholly unknown to me as she is, and wholly unknown to her as
I am, has an influence over my life."

"Well, perhaps you are right," said Athos. "I do not know a woman that
is worth the trouble of being sought for when she is once lost. Madame
Bonacieux is lost; so much the worse for her if she is found."


