"Fifty feet!" responded Dantes, almost terrified.

"Do not speak so loud, young man--don't speak so loud. It frequently
occurs in a state prison like this, that persons are stationed outside
the doors of the cells purposely to overhear the conversation of the
prisoners."

"But they believe I am shut up alone here."

"That makes no difference."

"And you say that you dug your way a distance of fifty feet to get
here?"

"I do; that is about the distance that separates your chamber from mine;
only, unfortunately, I did not curve aright; for want of the necessary
geometrical instruments to calculate my scale of proportion, instead of
taking an ellipsis of forty feet, I made it fifty. I expected, as I told
you, to reach the outer wall, pierce through it, and throw myself into
the sea; I have, however, kept along the corridor on which your chamber
opens, instead of going beneath it. My labor is all in vain, for I find
that the corridor looks into a courtyard filled with soldiers."

"That's true," said Dantes; "but the corridor you speak of only bounds
one side of my cell; there are three others--do you know anything of
their situation?"

"This one is built against the solid rock, and it would take ten
experienced miners, duly furnished with the requisite tools, as many
years to perforate it. This adjoins the lower part of the governor's
apartments, and were we to work our way through, we should only get
into some lock-up cellars, where we must necessarily be recaptured. The
fourth and last side of your cell faces on--faces on--stop a minute, now
where does it face?"

The wall of which he spoke was the one in which was fixed the loophole
by which light was admitted to the chamber. This loophole, which
gradually diminished in size as it approached the outside, to an opening
through which a child could not have passed, was, for better security,
furnished with three iron bars, so as to quiet all apprehensions even
in the mind of the most suspicious jailer as to the possibility of a
prisoner's escape. As the stranger asked the question, he dragged the
table beneath the window.

"Climb up," said he to Dantes. The young man obeyed, mounted on the
table, and, divining the wishes of his companion, placed his back
securely against the wall and held out both hands. The stranger, whom
as yet Dantes knew only by the number of his cell, sprang up with an
agility by no means to be expected in a person of his years, and, light
and steady on his feet as a cat or a lizard, climbed from the table to
the outstretched hands of Dantes, and from them to his shoulders;
then, bending double, for the ceiling of the dungeon prevented him from
holding himself erect, he managed to slip his head between the upper
bars of the window, so as to be able to command a perfect view from top
to bottom.

An instant afterwards he hastily drew back his head, saying, "I thought
so!" and sliding from the shoulders of Dantes as dextrously as he had
ascended, he nimbly leaped from the table to the ground.

"What was it that you thought?" asked the young man anxiously, in his
turn descending from the table.

The elder prisoner pondered the matter. "Yes," said he at length, "it
is so. This side of your chamber looks out upon a kind of open gallery,
where patrols are continually passing, and sentries keep watch day and
night."

"Are you quite sure of that?"

"Certain. I saw the soldier's shape and the top of his musket; that made
me draw in my head so quickly, for I was fearful he might also see me."

"Well?" inquired Dantes.

"You perceive then the utter impossibility of escaping through your
dungeon?"

"Then," pursued the young man eagerly--

"Then," answered the elder prisoner, "the will of God be done!" and
as the old man slowly pronounced those words, an air of profound
resignation spread itself over his careworn countenance. Dantes gazed on
the man who could thus philosophically resign hopes so long and ardently
nourished with an astonishment mingled with admiration.

"Tell me, I entreat of you, who and what you are?" said he at length;
"never have I met with so remarkable a person as yourself."


