"Yes, sir," answered the host, even more surprised at the question
than he had been by the silence which had preceded it; "I am Gaspard
Caderousse, at your service."

"Gaspard Caderousse," rejoined the priest. "Yes,--Christian and surname
are the same. You formerly lived, I believe in the Allees de Meillan, on
the fourth floor?"

"I did."

"And you followed the business of a tailor?"

"True, I was a tailor, till the trade fell off. It is so hot at
Marseilles, that really I believe that the respectable inhabitants will
in time go without any clothing whatever. But talking of heat, is there
nothing I can offer you by way of refreshment?"

"Yes; let me have a bottle of your best wine, and then, with your
permission, we will resume our conversation from where we left off."

"As you please, sir," said Caderousse, who, anxious not to lose the
present opportunity of finding a customer for one of the few bottles of
Cahors still remaining in his possession, hastily raised a trap-door in
the floor of the apartment they were in, which served both as parlor
and kitchen. Upon issuing forth from his subterranean retreat at the
expiration of five minutes, he found the abbe seated upon a wooden
stool, leaning his elbow on a table, while Margotin, whose animosity
seemed appeased by the unusual command of the traveller for
refreshments, had crept up to him, and had established himself very
comfortably between his knees, his long, skinny neck resting on his lap,
while his dim eye was fixed earnestly on the traveller's face.

"Are you quite alone?" inquired the guest, as Caderousse placed before
him the bottle of wine and a glass.

"Quite, quite alone," replied the man--"or, at least, practically so,
for my poor wife, who is the only person in the house besides myself, is
laid up with illness, and unable to render me the least assistance, poor
thing!"

"You are married, then?" said the priest, with a show of interest,
glancing round as he spoke at the scanty furnishings of the apartment.

"Ah, sir," said Caderousse with a sigh, "it is easy to perceive I am not
a rich man; but in this world a man does not thrive the better for being
honest." The abbe fixed on him a searching, penetrating glance.

"Yes, honest--I can certainly say that much for myself," continued the
inn-keeper, fairly sustaining the scrutiny of the abbe's gaze; "I
can boast with truth of being an honest man; and," continued he
significantly, with a hand on his breast and shaking his head, "that is
more than every one can say nowadays."

"So much the better for you, if what you assert be true," said the
abbe; "for I am firmly persuaded that, sooner or later, the good will be
rewarded, and the wicked punished."

"Such words as those belong to your profession," answered Caderousse,
"and you do well to repeat them; but," added he, with a bitter
expression of countenance, "one is free to believe them or not, as one
pleases."

"You are wrong to speak thus," said the abbe; "and perhaps I may, in my
own person, be able to prove to you how completely you are in error."

"What mean you?" inquired Caderousse with a look of surprise.

"In the first place, I must be satisfied that you are the person I am in
search of."

"What proofs do you require?"

"Did you, in the year 1814 or 1815, know anything of a young sailor
named Dantes?"

"Dantes? Did I know poor dear Edmond? Why, Edmond Dantes and myself
were intimate friends!" exclaimed Caderousse, whose countenance flushed
darkly as he caught the penetrating gaze of the abbe fixed on him, while
the clear, calm eye of the questioner seemed to dilate with feverish
scrutiny.

"You remind me," said the priest, "that the young man concerning whom I
asked you was said to bear the name of Edmond."

"Said to bear the name!" repeated Caderousse, becoming excited and
eager. "Why, he was so called as truly as I myself bore the appellation
of Gaspard Caderousse; but tell me, I pray, what has become of poor
Edmond? Did you know him? Is he alive and at liberty? Is he prosperous
and happy?"

"He died a more wretched, hopeless, heart-broken prisoner than the
felons who pay the penalty of their crimes at the galleys of Toulon."

A deadly pallor followed the flush on the countenance of Caderousse, who
turned away, and the priest saw him wiping the tears from his eyes with
the corner of the red handkerchief twisted round his head.

"Poor fellow, poor fellow!" murmured Caderousse. "Well, there, sir, is
another proof that good people are never rewarded on this earth, and
that none but the wicked prosper. Ah," continued Caderousse, speaking
in the highly colored language of the south, "the world grows worse and
worse. Why does not God, if he really hates the wicked, as he is said to
do, send down brimstone and fire, and consume them altogether?"

"You speak as though you had loved this young Dantes," observed the
abbe, without taking any notice of his companion's vehemence.

"And so I did," replied Caderousse; "though once, I confess, I envied
him his good fortune. But I swear to you, sir, I swear to you, by
everything a man holds dear, I have, since then, deeply and sincerely
lamented his unhappy fate." There was a brief silence, during which
the fixed, searching eye of the abbe was employed in scrutinizing the
agitated features of the inn-keeper.

"You knew the poor lad, then?" continued Caderousse.

"I was called to see him on his dying bed, that I might administer to
him the consolations of religion."

"And of what did he die?" asked Caderousse in a choking voice.

"Of what, think you, do young and strong men die in prison, when
they have scarcely numbered their thirtieth year, unless it be of
imprisonment?" Caderousse wiped away the large beads of perspiration
that gathered on his brow.

"But the strangest part of the story is," resumed the abbe, "that
Dantes, even in his dying moments, swore by his crucified Redeemer, that
he was utterly ignorant of the cause of his detention."

"And so he was," murmured Caderousse. "How should he have been
otherwise? Ah, sir, the poor fellow told you the truth."

"And for that reason, he besought me to try and clear up a mystery he
had never been able to penetrate, and to clear his memory should any
foul spot or stain have fallen on it."

And here the look of the abbe, becoming more and more fixed, seemed to
rest with ill-concealed satisfaction on the gloomy depression which was
rapidly spreading over the countenance of Caderousse.

"A rich Englishman," continued the abbe, "who had been his companion
in misfortune, but had been released from prison during the second
restoration, was possessed of a diamond of immense value; this jewel he
bestowed on Dantes upon himself quitting the prison, as a mark of his
gratitude for the kindness and brotherly care with which Dantes had
nursed him in a severe illness he underwent during his confinement.
Instead of employing this diamond in attempting to bribe his jailers,
who might only have taken it and then betrayed him to the governor,
Dantes carefully preserved it, that in the event of his getting out of
prison he might have wherewithal to live, for the sale of such a diamond
would have quite sufficed to make his fortune."


