"There they beheld the beautiful form of the fully grown maiden,
 Looked on the charming young girls, who rather might still be called children.
 Savage desire possessed them; at once with merciless passion
 They that trembling band assailed and the high-hearted maiden.
 But she had snatched in an instant the sword of one from its scabbard,
 Felled him with might to the ground, and stretched him bleeding before her.
 Then with vigorous strokes she bravely delivered the maidens,
 Smiting yet four of the robbers; who saved themselves only by flying.
 Then she bolted the gates, and, armed, awaited assistance."

 Now when this praise the minister heard bestowed on the maiden,
 Rose straightway for his friend a feeling of hope in his bosom,
 And he had opened his lips to inquire what further befell her,
 If on this mournful flight she now with her people were present;
 When with a hasty step the village doctor approached them,
 Twitched the clergyman's coat, and said in his ear in a whisper:
 "I have discovered the maiden at last among several hundreds;
 By the description I knew her, so come, let thine own eyes behold her!
 Bring too the magistrate with thee, that so we may hear him yet further."
 But as they turned to go, the justice was summoned to leave them,
 Sent for by some of his people by whom his counsel was needed.

 Straightway the preacher, however, the lead of the doctor had followed
 Up to a gap in the fence where his finger he meaningly pointed.
 "Seest thou the maiden?" he said: "she has made some clothes for the baby
 Out of the well-known chintz,--I distinguish it plainly; and further
 There are the covers of blue that Hermann gave in his bundle.
 Well and quickly, forsooth, she has turned to advantage the presents.
 Evident tokens are these, and all else answers well the description.
 Mark how the stomacher's scarlet sets off the arch of her bosom,
 Prettily laced, and the bodice of black fits close to her figure;
 Neatly the edge of her kerchief is plaited into a ruffle,
 Which, with a simple grace, her chin's rounded outline encircles;
 Freely and lightly rises above it the bead's dainty oval,
 And her luxuriant hair over silver bodkins is braided.
 Now she is sitting, yet still we behold her majestical stature,
 And the blue petticoat's ample plaits, that down from her bosom
 Hangs in abundant folds about her neatly shaped ankles,
 She without question it is; come, therefore, and let us discover
 Whether she honest and virtuous be, a housewifely maiden."

 Then, as the seated figure he studied, the pastor made answer:
 "Truly, I find it no wonder that she so enchanted the stripling,
 Since, to a man's experienced eye, she seems lacking in nothing.
 Happy to whom mother Nature a shape harmonious has given!

 "Such will always commend him, and he can be nowhere a stranger.
 All approach with delight, and all are delighted to linger,
 If to the outward shape correspond but a courteous spirit.
 I can assure thee, in her the youth has found him a maiden,
 Who, in the days to come, his life shall gloriously brighten,
 Standing with womanly strength in every necessity by him.
 Surely the soul must be pure that inhabits a body so perfect,
 And of a happy old age such vigorous youth is the promise."

 Thereupon answered and said the doctor in language of caution:
 "Often appearances cheat; I like not to trust to externals.
 For I have oft seen put to the test the truth of the proverb:
 Till thou a bushel of salt with a new acquaintance hast eaten,
 Be not too ready to trust him; for time alone renders thee certain
 How ye shall fare with each other, and how well your friendship shall prosper.
 Let us then rather at first make inquiries among the good people
 By whom the maiden is known, and who can inform us about her."

 "Much I approve of thy caution," the preacher replied as he followed.
 "Not for ourselves is the suit, and 'tis delicate wooing for others."

 Towards the good magistrate, then, the men directed their footsteps,
 Who was again ascending the street in discharge of his duties.

 Him the judicious pastor at once addressed and with caution.
 "Look! we a maiden have here descried in the neighboring garden,
 Under an apple-tree sitting, and making up garments for children

 "Out of second-hand stuff that somebody doubtless has given;
 And we were pleased with her aspect: she seems like a girl to be trusted.
 Tell us whatever thou knowest: we ask it with honest intentions."

 Soon as the magistrate nearer had come, and looked into the garden,
 "Her thou knowest already," he said; "for when I was telling
 Of the heroic deed performed by the hand of that maiden,
 When she snatched the man's sword, and delivered herself and her charges,
 This was the one! she is vigorous born, as thou seest by her stature;
 Yet she is good as strong, for her aged kinsman she tended
 Until the day of his death, which was finally hastened by sorrow
 Over his city's distress, and his own endangered possessions.
 Also, with quiet submission, she bore the death of her lover,
 Who a high-spirited youth, in the earliest flush of excitement,
 Kindled by lofty resolve to fight for a glorious freedom,
 Hurried to Paris, where early a terrible death he encountered.
 For as at home, so there, his foes were deceit and oppression."

 Thus the magistrate spoke. The others saluted and thanked him,
 And from his purse a gold-piece the pastor drew forth:--for the silver
 He had some hours before already in charity given,
 When he in mournful groups had seen the poor fugitives passing;--
 And to the magistrate handed it, saying: "Apportion the money
 'Mongst thy destitute people, and God vouchsafe it an increase."
 But the stranger declined it, and, answering, said: "We have rescued
 Many a dollar among us, with clothing and other possessions,
 And shall return, as I hope, ere yet our stock is exhausted."

 Then the pastor replied, and pressed the money upon him:
 "None should be backward in giving in days like the present, and no one
 Ought to refuse to accept those gifts which in kindness are offered.
 None can tell how long he may hold what in peace he possesses,
 None how much longer yet he shall roam through the land of the stranger,
 And of his farm be deprived, and deprived of the garden that feeds him."

 "Ay, to be sure!" in his bustling way interrupted the doctor:
 "If I had only some money about me, ye surely should have it,
 Little and big; for certainly many among you must need it.
 Yet I'll not go without giving thee something to show what my will is,
 Even though sadly behind my good-will must lag the performance."
 Thus, as he spoke, by its straps his embroidered pocket of leather,
 Where his tobacco was kept, he drew forth,--enough was now in it
 Several pipes to fill,--and daintily opened, and portioned.
 "Small is the gift," he added. The justice, however, made answer:
 "Good tobacco can ne'er to the traveller fail to be welcome."
 Then did the village doctor begin to praise his canister.

 But the clergyman drew him away, and they quitted the justice.
 "Let us make haste," said the thoughtful man: "the youth's waiting in torture;
 Come I let him hear, as soon as he may, the jubilant tidings."

 So they hastened their steps, and came to where under the lindens
 Hermann against the carriage was leaning. The horses were stamping
 Wildly the turf; he held them in check, and, buried in musing,
 Stood, into vacancy gazing before him; nor saw the two envoys,
 Till, as they came, they called out and made to him signals of triumph.
 E'en as far off as they then were, the doctor began to address him;
 But they were presently nearer come and then the good pastor
 Grasped his hand and exclaimed, interrupting the word of his comrade:
 "Hail to thee, O young man! thy true eye and heart have well chosen;
 Joy be to thee and the wife of thy youth; for of thee she is worthy.
 Come then and turn us the wagon, and drive straightway to the village,
 There the good maid to woo, and soon bring her home to thy dwelling."

 Still, however, the young man stood, without sign of rejoicing
 Hearing his messenger's words, though heavenly they were and consoling.
 Deeply he sighed as he said: "With hurrying wheels we came hither,
 And shall be forced, perchance, to go mortified homeward and slowly.
 For disquiet has fallen upon me since here I've been waiting,
 Doubt and suspicion and all that can torture the heart of a lover.
 Think ye we have but to come, and that then the maiden will follow
 Merely because we are rich, while she is poor and an exile?

 "Poverty, too, makes proud, when it comes unmerited! Active
 Seems she to be, and contented, and so of the world is she mistress.
 Think ye a maiden like her, with the manners and beauty that she has,
 Can into woman have grown, and no worthy man's love have attracted?
 Think ye that love until now can have been shut out from her bosom?
 Drive not thither too rashly: we might to our mortification
 Have to turn softly homewards our horses' heads. For my fear is
 That to some youth already this heart has been given; already
 This brave hand has been clasped, has pledged faith to some fortunate lover.
 Then with my offer, alas! I should stand in confusion before her."

 Straightway the pastor had opened his lips to speak consolation,
 When his companion broke in, and said in his voluble fashion:
 "Years ago, forsooth, unknown had been such a dilemma.
 All such affairs were then conducted in regular fashion.
 Soon as a bride for their son had been by the parents selected,
 First some family friend they into their councils would summon,
 Whom they afterwards sent as a suitor to visit the parents
 Of the elected bride. Arrayed in his finest apparel,
 Soon after dinner on Sunday he sought the respectable burgher,
 When some friendly words were exchanged upon general subjects,
 He knowing how to direct the discourse as suited his purpose.
 After much circumlocution he finally mentioned the daughter,
 Praising her highly; and praising the man and the house that had sent him.
 Persons of tact perceived his intent, and the politic envoy
 Readily saw how their minds were disposed, and explained himself further.
 Then were the offer declined, e'en the 'no' brought not mortification;
 But did it meet with success, the suitor was ever thereafter
 Made the chief guest in the house on every festive occasion.
 For, through the rest of their lives, the couple ne'er failed to remember
 That 'twas by his experienced hand the first knot had been gathered.
 All that, however, is changed, and, with many another good custom,
 Quite fallen out of the fashion; for every man woos for himself now.
 Therefore let every man hear to his face pronounced the refusal,
 If a refusal there be, and stand shamed in the sight of the maiden!"

 "Let that be as it may!" made answer the youth, who had scarcely
 Unto the words paid heed; but in silence had made his decision.
 "I will go thither myself, will myself hear my destiny spoken
 Out of the lips of a maiden in whom I a confidence cherish
 Greater than heart of man has e'er before cherished in woman.
 Say what she will, 'twill be good and wise; of that I am certain.
 Should I behold her never again, yet this once will I see her;
 Yet this once the clear gaze of those dark eyes will encounter,
 If I must press her ne'er to my heart, yet that neck and that bosom
 Will I behold once more, that my arm so longs to encircle;
 Once more that mouth will see, whose kiss and whose 'yes' would for ever
 Render me happy, from which a 'no' will for ever destroy me.
 But ye must leave me alone. Do not wait for me here; but return ye
 Back to my father and mother again, and give them the knowledge
 That their son has not been deceived, that the maiden is worthy.
 So then leave me alone! I shall follow the footpath that crosses
 Over the hill by the pear-tree, and thence descends through our vineyard,
 Taking a shorter way home. And oh, may I bring to our dwelling,
 Joyful and quick my beloved! but perhaps I alone may come creeping
 Over that path to the house, and ne'er again tread it with gladness."


