       As he went up he disturbed a large group of children playing on
the stairs who looked at him as he stepped through their rows.  "Next
time I come here," he said to himself, "I must either bring sweets with
me to make them like me or a stick to hit them with."  Just before he
reached the first landing he even had to wait a little while until a
ball had finished its movement, two small lads with sly faces like
grown-up scoundrels held him by his trouser-legs until it had; if he
were to shake them off he would have to hurt them, and he was afraid of
what noise they would make by shouting.

        On the first floor, his search began for real.  He still felt
unable to ask for the investigating committee, and so he invented a
joiner called Lanz - that name occurred to him because the captain, Mrs.
Grubach's nephew, was called Lanz - so that he could ask at every flat
whether Lanz the joiner lived there and thus obtain a chance to look
into the rooms.  It turned out, though, that that was mostly possible
without further ado, as almost all the doors were left open and the
children ran in and out.  Most of them were small, one-windowed rooms
where they also did the cooking.  Many women held babies in one arm and
worked at the stove with the other.   Half grown girls, who seemed to be
dressed in just their pinafores worked hardest running to and fro.  In
every room, the beds were still in use by people who were ill, or still
asleep, or people stretched out on them in their clothes.  K. knocked at
the flats where the doors were closed and asked whether Lanz the joiner
lived there.   It was usually a woman who opened the door, heard the
enquiry and turned to somebody in the room who would raise himself from
the bed.  "The gentleman's asking if a joiner called Lanz, lives here."
"A joiner, called Lanz?" he would ask from the bed."  "That's right," K.
would say, although it was clear that the investigating committee was
not to be found there, and so his task was at an end.  There were many
who thought it must be very important for K. to find Lanz the joiner and
thought long about it, naming a joiner who was not called Lanz or giving
a name that had some vague similarity with Lanz, or they asked
neighbours or accompanied K. to a door a long way away where they
thought someone of that sort might live in the back part of the building
or where someone would be who could advise K. better than they could
themselves.  K. eventually had to give up asking if he did not want to
be led all round from floor to floor in this way.  He regretted his
initial plan, which had at first seemed so practical to him.  As he
reached the fifth floor, he decided to give up the search, took his
leave of a friendly, young worker who wanted to lead him on still
further and went down the stairs.  But then the thought of how much time
he was wasting made him cross, he went back again and knocked at the
first door on the fifth floor.  The first thing he saw in the small room
was a large clock on the wall which already showed ten o'clock.  "Is
there a joiner called Lanz who lives here?" he asked.  "Pardon?" said a
young woman with black, shining eyes who was, at that moment, washing
children's underclothes in a bucket.  She pointed her wet hand towards
the open door of the adjoining room.

        K. thought he had stepped into a meeting.  A medium sized, two
windowed room was filled with the most diverse crowd of people - nobody
paid any attention to the person who had just entered.  Close under its
ceiling it was surrounded by a gallery which was also fully occupied and
where the people could only stand bent down with their heads and their
backs touching the ceiling.  K., who found the air too stuffy, stepped
out again and said to the young woman, who had probably misunderstood
what he had said, "I asked for a joiner, someone by the name of Lanz."
"Yes," said the woman, "please go on in."  K. would probably not have
followed her if the woman had not gone up to him, taken hold of the door
handle and said, "I'll have to close the door after you, no-one else
will be allowed in."  "Very sensible," said K., "but it's too full
already."  But then he went back in anyway.  He passed through between
two men who were talking beside the door - one of them held both hands
far out in front of himself making the movements of counting out money,
the other looked him closely in the eyes - and someone took him by the
hand.  It was a small, red-faced youth.  "Come in, come in," he said.
K. let himself be led by him, and it turned out that there was -
surprisingly in a densely packed crowd of people moving to and fro - a
narrow passage which may have been the division between two factions;
this idea was reinforced by the fact that in the first few rows to the
left and the right of him there was hardly any face looking in his
direction, he saw nothing but the backs of people directing their speech
and their movements only towards members of their own side.  Most of
them were dressed in black, in old, long, formal frock coats that hung
down loosely around them.  These clothes were the only thing that
puzzled  K., as he would otherwise have taken the whole assembly for a
local political meeting.

