        When K. entered, Miss Montag came towards him from the window
along one side of the table.  They greeted each other in silence.  Then
Miss Montag, her head unusually erect as always, said, "I'm not sure
whether you know me."  K. looked at her with a frown.  "Of course I do,"
he said, "you've been living here with Mrs. Grubach for quite some time
now."  "But I get the impression you don't pay much attention to what's
going on in the lodging house,"  said Miss Montag.  "No," said K.
"Would you not like to sit down?" said Miss Montag.  In silence, the two
of them drew chairs out from the farthest end of the table and sat down
facing each other.  But Miss Montag stood straight up again as she had
left her handbag on the window sill and went to fetch it; she shuffled
down the whole length of the room.  When she came back, the handbag
lightly swinging, she said, "I'd like just to have a few words with you
on behalf of my friend.  She would have come herself, but she's feeling
a little unwell today.  Perhaps you'll be kind enough to forgive her and
listen to me instead.  There's anyway nothing that she could have said
that I won't.  On the contrary, in fact, I think I can say even more
than her because I'm relatively impartial.  Would you not agree?"  "What
is there to say, then?" answered K., who was tired of Miss Montag
continuously watching his lips.  In that way she took control of what he
wanted to say before he said it.  "Miss Bürstner clearly refuses to
grant me the personal meeting that I asked her for."  "That's how it
is," said Miss Montag, "or rather, that's not at all how it is, the way
you put it is remarkably severe.  Generally speaking, meetings are
neither granted nor the opposite.  But it can be that meetings are
considered unnecessary, and that's how it is here.  Now, after your
comment, I can speak openly.  You asked my friend, verbally or in
writing, for the chance to speak with her.  Now my friend is aware of
your reasons for asking for this meeting - or at least I suppose she is
- and so, for reasons I know nothing about, she is quite sure that it
would be of no benefit to anyone if this meeting actually took place.
Moreover, it was only yesterday, and only very briefly, that she made it
clear to me that such a meeting could be of no benefit for yourself
either, she feels that it can only have been a matter of chance that
such an idea came to you, and that even without any explanations from
her, you will very soon come to realise yourself, if you have not done
so already, the futility of your idea.  My answer to that is that
although it may be quite right, I consider it advantageous, if the
matter is to be made perfectly clear, to give you an explicit answer.  I
offered my services in taking on the task, and after some hesitation my
friend conceded.  I hope, however, also to have acted in your interests,
as even the slightest uncertainty in the least significant of matters
will always remain a cause of suffering and if, as in this case, it can
be removed without substantial effort, then it is better if that is done
without delay."  "I thank you," said K. as soon as Miss Montag had
finished.  He stood slowly up, looked at her, then across the table,
then out the window - the house opposite stood there in the sun - and
went to the door.  Miss Montag followed him a few paces, as if she did
not quite trust him.  At the door, however, both of them had to step
back as it opened and Captain Lanz entered.  This was the first time
that K. had seen him close up.  He was a large man of about forty with a
tanned, fleshy face.  He bowed slightly, intending it also for K., and
then went over to Miss Montag and deferentially kissed her hand.  He was
very elegant in the way he moved. The courtesy he showed towards Miss
Montag made a striking contrast with the way she had been treated by K.
Nonetheless, Miss Montag did not seem to be cross with K. as it even
seemed to him that she wanted to introduce the captain.  K. however, did
not want to be introduced, he would not have been able to show any sort
of friendliness either to Miss Montag or to the captain, the kiss on the
hand had, for K., bound them into a group which would keep him at a
distance from Miss Bürstner whilst at the same time seeming to be
totally harmless and unselfish.  K. thought, however, that he saw more
than that, he thought he also saw that Miss Montag had chosen a means of
doing it that was good, but two-edged.  She exaggerated the importance
of the relationship between K. and Miss Bürstner, and above all she
exaggerated the importance of asking to speak with her and she tried at
the same time to make out that K. was exaggerating everything.  She
would be disappointed, K. did not want to exaggerate anything, he was
aware that Miss Bürstner was a little typist who would not offer him
much resistance for long.  In doing so he deliberately took no account
of what Mrs. Grubach had told him about Miss Bürstner.  All these things
were going through his mind as he left the room with hardly a polite
word.  He wanted to go straight to his room, but a little laugh from
Miss Montag that he heard from the dining room behind him brought him to
the idea that he might prepare a  surprise for the two of them, the
captain and Miss Montag.  He looked round and listened to find out if
there might be any disturbance from any of the surrounding rooms,
everywhere was quiet, the only thing to be heard was the conversation
from the dining room and Mrs. Grubach's voice from the passage leading
to the kitchen.  This seemed an opportune time, K. went to Miss
Bürstner's room and knocked gently.  There was no sound so he knocked
again but there was still no answer in reply.  Was she asleep?  Or was
she really unwell?  Or was she just pretending as she realised it could
only be K. knocking so gently?  K. assumed she was pretending and
knocked harder, eventually, when the knocking brought no result, he
carefully opened the door with the sense of doing something that was not
only improper but also pointless.  In the room there was no-one.  What's
more, it looked hardly at all like the room K. had known before.
Against the wall there were now two beds behind one another, there were
clothes piled up on three chairs near the door, a wardrobe stood open.
Miss Bürstner must have gone out while Miss Montag was speaking to him
in the dining room.  K. was not greatly bothered by this, he had hardly
expected to be able to find Miss Bürstner so easily and had made this
attempt for little more reason than to spite Miss Montag.  But that made
it all the more embarrassing for him when, as he was closing the door
again, he saw Miss Montag and the captain talking in the open doorway of
the dining room.  They had probably been standing there ever since K.
had opened the door, they avoided seeming to observe K. but chatted
lightly and followed his movements with glances, the absent minded
glances to the side such as you make during a conversation.  But these
glances were heavy for K., and he rushed alongside the wall back into
his own room.


