
        There was then a noise that everyone heard from the hallway as if
something of porcelain were being broken.  "I'll go and see what's
happened," said K., who slowly left the room as if giving the others the
chance to stop him.  He had hardly stepped into the hallway, finding his
bearings in the darkness with his hand still firmly holding the door,
when another small hand, much smaller than K.'s own, placed itself on
his and gently shut the door.  It was the carer who had been waiting
there.  "Nothing has happened," she whispered to him, "I just threw a
plate against the wall to get you out of there."   "I was thinking about
you, as well," replied K. uneasily.  "So much the better," said the
carer.  "Come with me".  A few steps along, they came to a frosted glass
door which the carer opened for him.  "Come in here," she said.  It was
clearly the lawyer's office, fitted out with old, heavy furniture, as
far as could be seen in the moonlight which now illuminated just a
small, rectangular section of the floor by each of the three big
windows.  "This way," said the carer, pointing to a dark trunk with a
carved, wooden backrest.  When he had sat down, K. continued to look
round the room, it was a large room with a high ceiling, the clients of
this lawyer for the poor must have felt quite lost in it.  K. thought he
could see the little steps with which visitors would approach the
massive desk.  But then he forgot about all of this and had eyes only
for the carer who sat very close beside him, almost pressing him against
the armrest.  "I did think," she said "you would come out here to me by
yourself without me having to call you first.  It was odd.  First you stare
at me as soon as you come in, and then you keep me waiting.  And you
ought to call me Leni, too," she added quickly and suddenly, as if no
moment of this conversation should be lost.  "Gladly," said K.  "But as
for its being odd, Leni, that's easy to explain.  Firstly, I had to
listen to what the old men were saying and couldn't leave without a good
reason, but secondly I'm not a bold  person, if anything I'm quite shy,
and you, Leni, you didn't really look like you could be won over in one
stroke, either."  "That's not it," said Leni, laying one arm on the
armrest and looking at K., "you didn't like me, and I don't suppose you
like me now, either."  "Liking wouldn't be very much," said K.,
evasively.  "Oh!" she exclaimed with a smile, thus making use of  K.'s
comment to gain an advantage over him.  So K. remained silent for a
while.  By now, he had become used to the darkness in the room and was
able to make out various fixtures and fittings.  He was especially
impressed by a large picture hanging to the right of the door, he leant
forward in order to see it better.  It depicted a man wearing a judge's
robes; he was sitting on a lofty throne gilded in a way that shone forth
from the picture.  The odd thing about the picture was that this judge
was not sitting there in dignified calm but had his left arm pressed
against the back and armrest, his right arm, however, was completely
free and only grasped the armrest with his hand, as if about to jump up
any moment in vigorous outrage and make some decisive comment or even to
pass sentence.  The accused was probably meant to be imagined at the
foot of the steps, the top one of which could be seen in the picture,
covered with a yellow carpet.  "That might be my judge," said K.,
pointing to the picture with one finger.  "I know him," said Leni
looking up at the picture, "he comes here quite often.  That picture is
from when he was young, but he can never have looked anything like it,
as he's tiny, minute almost.  But despite that, he had himself made to
look bigger in the picture as he's madly vain, just like everyone round
here.  But even I'm vain and that makes me very unhappy that you don't
like me."  K. replied to that last comment merely by embracing Leni and
drawing her towards him, she lay her head quietly on his shoulder.  To
the rest of it, though, he said, "What rank is he?"  "He's an examining
judge," she said, taking hold of the hand with which K. held her and
playing with his fingers.  "Just an examining judge once again," said K.
in disappointment, "the senior officials keep themselves hidden.  But
here he is sitting on a throne."  "That's all just made up," said Leni
with her face bent over K.'s hand, "really he's sitting on a kitchen
chair with an old horse blanket folded over it.  But do you have to be
always thinking about your trial?" she added slowly.  "No, not at all,"
said K., "I probably even think too little about it."  "That's not the
mistake you're making," said Leni, "you're too unyielding, that's what
I've heard."  "Who said that?" asked K., he felt her body against his
chest and looked down on her rich, dark, tightly-bound hair.  "I'd be
saying too much if I told you that," answered Leni.  "Please don't ask
for names, but do stop making these mistakes of yours, stop being so
unyielding, there's nothing you can do to defend yourself from this
court, you have to confess.  So confess to them as soon as you get the
chance.  It's only then that they give you the chance to get away, not
till then.  Only, without help from outside even that's impossible, but
you needn't worry about getting this help as I want to help you myself."
"You understand a lot about this court and what sort of tricks are
needed," said K. as he lifted her, since she was pressing in much too
close to him, onto his lap.  "That's alright, then," she said, and made
herself comfortable on his lap by smoothing out her skirt and adjusting
her blouse.  Then she hung both her arms around his neck, leant back and
took a long look at him.  "And what if I don't confess, could you not
help me then?" asked K. to test her out.  I'm accumulating women to help
me, he thought to himself almost in amazement, first Miss Bürstner, then
the court usher's wife, and now this little care assistant who seems to
have some incomprehensible need for me.  The way she sits on my lap as
if it were her proper place!  "No," answered Leni, slowly shaking her
head, "I couldn't help you then.  But you don't want my help anyway, it
means nothing to you, you're too stubborn and won't be persuaded."
Then, after a while she asked, "Do you have a lover?"  "No," said K.
"Oh, you must have," she said.  "Well, I have really," said K.  "Just
think, I've even betrayed her while I'm carrying her photograph with
me."  Leni insisted he show her a photograph of Elsa, and then, hunched
on his lap, studied the picture closely.  The photograph was not one
that had been taken while Elsa was posing for it, it showed her just
after she had been in a wild dance such as she liked to do in wine bars,
her skirt was still flung out as she span round, she had placed her
hands on her firm hips and, with her neck held taut, looked to one side
with a laugh; you could not see from the picture whom her laugh was
intended for.  "She's very tightly laced," said Leni, pointing to the
place where she thought this could be seen.  "I don't like her, she's
clumsy and crude.  But maybe she's gentle and friendly towards you,
that's the impression you get from the picture.  Big, strong girls like
that often don't know how to be anything but gentle and friendly.  Would
she be capable of sacrificing herself for you, though?"  "No," said K.,
"she isn't gentle or friendly, and nor would she be capable of
sacrificing herself for me.  But I've never yet asked any of those
things of her.  I've never looked at this picture as closely as you."
"You can't think much of her, then," said Leni. "She can't be your lover
after all."  "Yes she is," said K., "I'm not going to take my word back
on that."  "Well she might be your lover now, then," said Leni, "but you
wouldn't miss her much if you lost her or if you exchanged her for
somebody else, me for instance."  "That is certainly conceivable," said
K. with a smile, "but she does have one major advantage over you, she
knows nothing about my trial, and even if she did she wouldn't think
about it.  She wouldn't try to persuade me to be less unyielding."  "Well
that's no advantage," said Leni.  "If she's got no advantage other than
that, I can keep on hoping.  Has she got any bodily defects?"  "'Bodily
defects'?" asked K.  "Yeah," said Leni, "as I do have a bodily defect,
just a little one.  Look."  She spread the middle and ring fingers of
her right hand apart from each other.  Between those fingers the flap of
skin connecting them reached up almost as far as the top joint of the
little finger.  In the darkness, K. did not see at first what it was she
wanted to show him, so she led his hand to it so that he could feel.
"What a freak of nature," said K., and when he had taken a look at the
whole hand he added, "What a pretty claw!"  Leni looked on with a kind
of pride as K. repeatedly opened and closed her two fingers in
amazement, until, finally, he briefly kissed them and let go.  "Oh!" she
immediately exclaimed, "you kissed me!"  Hurriedly, and with her mouth
open, she clambered up K.'s lap with her knees.  He was almost aghast as
he looked up at her, now that she was so close to him there was a
bitter, irritating smell from her, like pepper, she grasped his head,
leant out over him, and bit and kissed his neck, even biting into his
hair.  "I've taken her place!" she exclaimed from time to time.  "Just
look, now you've taken me instead of her!"   Just then, her knee slipped
out and, with a little cry, she nearly fell down onto the carpet, K.
tried to hold her by putting his arms around her and was pulled down
with her.  "Now you're mine," she said.  Her last words to him as he
left were, "Here's the key to the door, come whenever you want", and she
planted an undirected kiss on his back.  When he stepped out the front
door there was a light rain falling, he was about to go to the middle of
the street to see if he could still glimpse Leni at the window when K.'s
uncle leapt out of a car that K., thinking of other things, had not seen
waiting outside the building.  He took hold of K. by both arms and
shoved him against the door as if he wanted to nail him to it.  "Young
man," he shouted, "how could you do a thing like that?!  Things were
going well with this business of yours, now you've caused it terrible
damage.  You slip off with some dirty, little thing who, moreover, is
obviously the lawyer's beloved, and stay away for hours.  You don't even
try to find an excuse, don't try to hide anything, no, you're quite open
about it, you run off with her and stay there.  And meanwhile we're
sitting there, your uncle who's going to such effort for you, the lawyer
who needs to be won over to your side, and above all the office
director, a very important gentleman who is in direct command of your
affair in its present stage.  We wanted to discuss how best to help you,
I had to handle the lawyer very carefully, he had to handle the office
director carefully, and you had most reason of all to at least give me
some support.  Instead of which you stay away.  Eventually we couldn't
keep up the pretence any longer, but these are polite and highly capable
men, they didn't say anything about it so as to spare my feelings but in
the end not even they could continue to force themselves and, as they
couldn't speak about the matter in hand, they became silent.  We sat
there for several minutes, listening to see whether you wouldn't finally
come back.  All in vain.  In the end the office director stood up, as he
had stayed far longer than he had originally intended, made his
farewell, looked at me in sympathy without being able to help, he waited
at the door for a long time although it's more than I can understand why
he was being so good, and then he went.  I, of course, was glad he'd
gone, I'd been holding my breath all this time.  All this had even more
affect on the lawyer lying there ill, when I took my leave of him, the
good man, he was quite unable to speak.  You have probably contributed
to his total collapse and so brought the very man who you are dependent
on closer to his death.  And me, your own uncle, you leave me here in
the rain - just feel this, I'm wet right through - waiting here for
hours, sick with worry."

