       The people in the front row looked up at him, showing such tension
on their faces that he looked back down at them for some time.  Every
one of them was an old man, some of them with white beards.  Could they
perhaps be the crucial group who could turn the whole assembly one way
or the other?  They had sunk into a state of  motionlessness while K.
gave his oration, and it had not been possible to raise them from this
passivity even when the judge was being humiliated.  "What has happened
to me," continued K., with less of the vigour he had had earlier, he
continually scanned the faces in the first row, and this gave his
address a somewhat nervous and distracted character, "what has happened
to me is not just an isolated case.  If it were it would not be of much
importance as it's not of much importance to me, but it is a symptom of
proceedings which are carried out against many.  It's on behalf of them
that I stand here now, not for myself alone."

        Without having intended it, he had raised his voice.  Somewhere in
the hall, someone raised his hands and applauded him shouting, "Bravo!
Why not then?  Bravo!  Again I say, Bravo!"  Some of the men in the
first row groped around in their beards, none of them looked round to
see who was shouting.  Not even K. thought him of any importance but it
did raise his spirits; he no longer thought it at all necessary that all
of those in the hall should applaud him, it was enough if the majority
of them began  to think about the matter and if only one of them, now
and then, was persuaded.

        "I'm not trying to be a successful orator," said K. after this
thought, "that's probably more than I'm capable of anyway.  I'm sure the
examining judge can speak far better than I can, it is part of his job
after all.  All that I want is a public discussion of a public wrong.
Listen: ten days ago I was placed under arrest, the arrest itself is
something I laugh about but that's beside the point.  They came for me
in the morning when I was still in bed.  Maybe the order had been given
to arrest some house painter - that seems possible after what the judge
has said - someone who is as innocent as I am, but it was me they chose.
There were two police thugs occupying the next room.  They could not
have taken better precautions if I had been a dangerous robber.  And
these policemen were unprincipled riff-raff, they talked at me till I
was sick of it, they wanted bribes, they wanted to trick me into giving
them my clothes, they wanted money, supposedly so that they could bring
me my breakfast after they had blatantly eaten my own breakfast in front
of my eyes.  And even that was not enough.  I was led in front of the
supervisor in another room.  This was the room of a lady who I have a
lot of respect for, and I was forced to look on while the supervisor and
the policemen made quite a mess of this room because of me, although not
through any fault of mine.  It was not easy to stay calm, but I managed
to do so and was completely calm when I asked the supervisor why it was
that I was under arrest.  If he were here he would have to confirm what
I say.  I can see him now, sitting on the chair belonging to that lady I
mentioned - a picture of dull-witted arrogance.  What do you think he
answered?  What he told me, gentlemen, was basically nothing at all;
perhaps he really did know nothing, he had placed me under arrest and
was satisfied.  In fact he had done more than that and brought three
junior employees from the bank where I work into the lady's room; they
had made themselves busy interfering with some photographs that belonged
to the lady and causing a mess.  There was, of course, another reason
for bringing these employees; they, just like my landlady and her maid,
were expected to spread the news of my arrest and damage my public
reputation and in particular to remove me from my position at the bank.
Well they didn't succeed in any of that, not in the slightest, even my
landlady, who is quite a simple person - and I will give you here her
name in full respect, her name is Mrs. Grubach - even Mrs. Grubach was
understanding enough to see that an arrest like this has no more
significance than an attack carried out on the street by some youths who
are not kept under proper control.  I repeat, this whole affair has
caused me nothing but unpleasantness and temporary irritation, but could
it not also have had some far worse consequences?"

        K. broke off here and looked at the judge, who said nothing.  As
he did so he thought he saw the judge use a movement of his eyes to give
a sign to someone in the crowd.  K. smiled and said, "And now the judge,
right next to me, is giving a secret sign to someone among you.  There
seems to be someone among you who is taking directions from above.  I
don't know whether the sign is meant to produce booing or applause, but
I'll resist trying to guess what its meaning is too soon.  It really
doesn't matter to me, and I give his lordship the judge my full and
public permission to stop giving secret signs to his paid subordinate
down there and give his orders in words instead; let him just say "Boo
now!," and then the next time "Clap now!".

