"It is his emblem--it is his picture," retorted the Recluse. "He is
at present tame, quiet, and domesticated, for lack of opportunity to
exercise his inborn propensities; but let the trumpet of war sound--let
the young blood-hound snuff blood, he will be as ferocious as the
wildest of his Border ancestors that ever fired a helpless peasant's
abode. Can you deny, that even at present he often urges you to take
bloody revenge for an injury received when you were a boy?"--Earnscliff
started; the Recluse appeared not to observe his surprise, and
proceeded--"The trumpet WILL blow, the young blood-hound WILL lap blood,
and I will laugh and say, For this I have preserved thee!" He paused,
and continued,--"Such are my cures;--their object, their purpose,
perpetuating the mass of misery, and playing even in this desert my
part in the general tragedy. Were YOU on your sick bed, I might, in
compassion, send you a cup of poison."

"I am much obliged to you, Elshie, and certainly shall not fail to
consult you, with so comfortable a hope from your assistance."

"Do not flatter yourself too far," replied the Hermit, "with the hope
that I will positively yield to the frailty of pity. Why should I snatch
a dupe, so well fitted to endure the miseries of life as you are, from
the wretchedness which his own visions, and the villainy of the world,
are preparing for him? Why should I play the compassionate Indian, and,
knocking out the brains of the captive with my tomahawk, at once spoil
the three days' amusement of my kindred tribe, at the very moment when
the brands were lighted, the pincers heated, the cauldrons boiling,
the knives sharpened, to tear, scorch, seethe, and scarify the intended
victim?"

"A dreadful picture you present to me of life, Elshie; but I am not
daunted by it," returned Earnscliff. "We are sent here, in one sense, to
bear and to suffer; but, in another, to do and to enjoy. The active day
has its evening of repose; even patient sufferance has its alleviations,
where there is a consolatory sense of duty discharged."

"I spurn at the slavish and bestial doctrine," said the Dwarf, his eyes
kindling with insane fury,--"I spurn at it, as worthy only of the beasts
that perish; but I will waste no more words with you."

He rose hastily; but, ere he withdrew into the hut, he added, with great
vehemence, "Yet, lest you still think my apparent benefits to
mankind flow from the stupid and servile source, called love of our
fellow-creatures, know, that were there a man who had annihilated my
soul's dearest hope--who had torn my heart to mammocks, and seared my
brain till it glowed like a volcano, and were that man's fortune and
life in my power as completely as this frail potsherd" (he snatched up
an earthen cup which stood beside him), "I would not dash him into atoms
thus"--(he flung the vessel with fury against the wall),--"No!" (he
spoke more composedly, but with the utmost bitterness), "I would pamper
him with wealth and power to inflame his evil passions, and to fulfil
his evil designs; he should lack no means of vice and villainy; he
should be the centre of a whirlpool that itself should know neither rest
nor peace, but boil with unceasing fury, while it wrecked every goodly
ship that approached its limits! he should be an earthquake capable
of shaking the very land in which he dwelt, and rendering all its
inhabitants friendless, outcast, and miserable--as I am!"


