"Our presence," answered Earnscliff, "seems only to irritate his frenzy;
we had better leave him, and send some one to provide him with food and
necessaries."

They did so. The servant dispatched for this purpose found the Dwarf
still labouring at his wall, but could not extract a word from him.
The lad, infected with the superstitions of the country, did not long
persist in an attempt to intrude questions or advice on so singular a
figure, but having placed the articles which he had brought for his use
on a stone at some distance, he left them at the misanthrope's disposal.

The Dwarf proceeded in his labours, day after day, with an assiduity so
incredible as to appear almost supernatural. In one day he often seemed
to have done the work of two men, and his building soon assumed
the appearance of the walls of a hut, which, though very small, and
constructed only of stones and turf, without any mortar, exhibited, from
the unusual size of the stones employed, an appearance of solidity very
uncommon for a cottage of such narrow dimensions and rude construction.
Earnscliff; attentive to his motions, no sooner perceived to what they
tended, than he sent down a number of spars of wood suitable for forming
the roof, which he caused to be left in the neighbourhood of the spot,
resolving next day to send workmen to put them up. But his purpose was
anticipated, for in the evening, during the night, and early in the
morning, the Dwarf had laboured so hard, and with such ingenuity, that
he had nearly completed the adjustment of the rafters. His next labour
was to cut rushes and thatch his dwelling, a task which he performed
with singular dexterity.

As he seemed averse to receive any aid beyond the occasional assistance
of a passenger, materials suitable to his purpose, and tools, were
supplied to him, in the use of which he proved to be skilful. He
constructed the door and window of his cot, he adjusted a rude bedstead,
and a few shelves, and appeared to become somewhat soothed in his temper
as his accommodations increased.

His next task was to form a strong enclosure, and to cultivate the land
within it to the best of his power; until, by transporting mould, and
working up what was upon the spot, he formed a patch of garden-ground.
It must be naturally supposed, that, as above hinted, this solitary
being received assistance occasionally from such travellers as crossed
the moor by chance, as well as from several who went from curiosity to
visit his works. It was, indeed, impossible to see a human creature, so
unfitted, at first sight, for hard labour, toiling with such unremitting
assiduity, without stopping a few minutes to aid him in his task; and,
as no one of his occasional assistants was acquainted with the degree
of help which the Dwarf had received from others, the celerity of his
progress lost none of its marvels in their eyes. The strong and compact
appearance of the cottage, formed in so very short a space, and by such
a being, and the superior skill which he displayed in mechanics, and in
other arts, gave suspicion to the surrounding neighbours. They insisted,
that, if he was not a phantom,--an opinion which was now
abandoned, since he plainly appeared a being of blood and bone with
themselves,--yet he must be in close league with the invisible world,
and have chosen that sequestered spot to carry on his communication with
them undisturbed. They insisted, though in a different sense from the
philosopher's application of the phrase, that he was never less alone
than when alone; and that from the heights which commanded the moor at
a distance, passengers often discovered a person at work along with
this dweller of the desert, who regularly disappeared as soon as they
approached closer to the cottage. Such a figure was also occasionally
seen sitting beside him at the door, walking with him in the moor, or
assisting him in fetching water from his fountain. Earnscliff explained
this phenomenon by supposing it to be the Dwarf's shadow.


